5:1:1:These are the words Moses spoke to all Israel on the other side of the Jordan River, in the wilderness, in the Arabah opposite Suph, between Paran and Tophel, Laban, Hazeroth, and Dizahab.
5:1:2:It is eleven days' journey from Horeb by way of Mount Seir to Kadesh Barnea.
5:1:3:In the fortieth year, on the first day of the eleventh month, Moses addressed the Israelites according to everything the Lord had instructed him to say to them.
5:1:4:This was after he had defeated Sihon, king of the Amorites, who lived in Heshbon, and Og, king of Bashan, who lived in Ashtaroth at Edrei.
5:1:5:On the other side of the Jordan, in the land of Moab, Moses began to explain this law, saying:
5:1:6:"The Lord our God spoke to us at Horeb, saying: 'You have stayed long enough at this mountain.
5:1:7:Set out now and go to the hill country of the Amorites and to all their neighboring territories in the Arabah, the mountains, the western foothills, the Negev, and along the seacoast to the land of the Canaanites and to Lebanon, as far as the great river Euphrates.
5:1:8:Look, I have placed the land before you. Go in and take possession of the land that the Lord swore to your ancestors, to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to give to them and their descendants after them.'
5:1:9:At that time, I said to you, 'I cannot carry you alone.
5:1:10:The Lord your God has multiplied you, and today you are as numerous as the stars in the sky.
5:1:11:May the Lord, the God of your ancestors, increase you a thousand times more and bless you, just as He has promised!
5:1:12:But how can I bear the burden of your disputes and problems all by myself?
5:1:13:Choose wise, understanding, and experienced men from each of your tribes, and I will appoint them as your leaders.'
5:1:14:You agreed with what I proposed, and said, 'The plan you have suggested is good.'
5:1:15:So I took the leading men of your tribes, wise and experienced individuals, and appointed them as leaders over you—commanders of thousands, commanders of hundreds, commanders of fifties, commanders of tens, and officials for your tribes.
5:1:16:I charged your judges at that time, saying, 'Hear the disputes between your people and judge fairly, whether the case is between two Israelites or between an Israelite and a foreigner residing among you.
5:1:17:Do not show partiality in judging; hear both small and great alike. Do not be afraid of anyone, for judgment belongs to God. Bring me any case too hard for you, and I will hear it.'
5:1:18:At that time, I instructed you in everything you were to do.
5:1:19:Then we set out from Horeb and went through all that vast and dreadful wilderness that you saw on the way to the hill country of the Amorites, as the Lord our God commanded us. And we reached Kadesh Barnea.
5:1:20:I said to you, 'You have reached the hill country of the Amorites, which the Lord our God is giving us.
5:1:21:See, the Lord your God has placed the land before you. Go up and take possession of it as the Lord, the God of your ancestors, told you. Do not be afraid; do not be discouraged.'
5:1:22:But all of you came to me and said, 'Let us send men ahead to spy out the land for us and bring back a report about the route we are to take and the towns we will come to.'
5:1:23:The idea seemed good to me, so I selected twelve of you, one man from each tribe.
5:1:24:They left and went up into the hill country, and came to the Valley of Eshcol and explored it.
5:1:25:Taking some of the fruit of the land in their hands, they brought it down to us and reported, 'It is a good land that the Lord our God is giving us.'
5:1:26:But you were unwilling to go up; you rebelled against the command of the Lord your God.
5:1:27:You grumbled in your tents and said, 'The Lord hates us; so He brought us out of Egypt to deliver us into the hands of the Amorites to destroy us.
5:1:28:Where can we go? Our brothers have made our hearts melt in fear. They say, "The people are stronger and taller than we are; the cities are large, with walls up to the sky. We even saw the Anakites there."'
5:1:29:Then I said to you, 'Do not be terrified; do not be afraid of them.
5:1:30:The Lord your God, who is going before you, will fight for you, as He did for you in Egypt, before your very eyes,
5:1:31:and in the wilderness. There you saw how the Lord your God carried you, as a father carries his son, all the way you went until you reached this place.'
5:1:32:In spite of this, you did not trust in the Lord your God,
5:1:33:who went ahead of you on your journey, in fire by night and in a cloud by day, to search out places for you to camp and to show you the way you should go.
5:1:34:When the Lord heard what you said, He was angry and solemnly swore:
5:1:35:'No one from this evil generation shall see the good land I swore to give your ancestors,
5:1:36:except Caleb son of Jephunneh. He will see it, and I will give him and his descendants the land he set his feet on, because he followed the Lord wholeheartedly.'
5:1:37:Because of you, the Lord became angry with me also and said, 'You shall not enter it, either.
5:1:38:But your assistant, Joshua son of Nun, will enter it. Encourage him, because he will lead Israel to inherit it.
5:1:39:And the little ones that you said would be taken captive, your children who do not yet know good from evil—they will enter the land. I will give it to them and they will take possession of it.
5:1:40:But as for you, turn around and set out toward the desert along the route to the Red Sea.'
5:1:41:Then you replied, 'We have sinned against the Lord. We will go up and fight, just as the Lord our God commanded us.' So every one of you put on his weapons, thinking it easy to go up into the hill country.
5:1:42:But the Lord said to me, 'Tell them, "Do not go up and fight, because I will not be with you. You will be defeated by your enemies."'
5:1:43:So I told you, but you would not listen. You rebelled against the Lord's command and in your arrogance you marched up into the hill country.
5:1:44:The Amorites who lived in those hills came out against you; they chased you like a swarm of bees and beat you down from Seir all the way to Hormah.
5:1:45:You came back and wept before the Lord, but He paid no attention to your weeping and turned a deaf ear to you.
5:1:46:And so you stayed in Kadesh many days—all the time you spent there.
5:2:1:We journeyed through the vast wilderness for a long time, as the Lord had instructed us. Finally, He told me,
5:2:2:"You have circled this mountain long enough; now head north.
5:2:3:Give the people these instructions: 'You will be passing through the territory of your relatives, the descendants of Esau who live in Seir. They will be afraid of you, so be very careful.
5:2:4:Do not provoke them, for I will not give you any of their land, not even enough to set your foot on. I have given Esau the hill country of Seir as his possession.
5:2:5:You shall buy food from them with money, so you may eat, and also purchase water from them with money, so you may drink.
5:2:6:For the Lord your God has blessed you in all the work of your hands. He knows your going through this great wilderness; these forty years the Lord your God has been with you, and you have lacked nothing.'"
5:2:7:So we went on, away from our relatives, the descendants of Esau who live in Seir, avoiding the road through the Arabah valley that comes up from Elath and Ezion-geber. Then we turned and traveled along the route of the wilderness of Moab.
5:2:8:The Lord said to me, "Do not harass the Moabites or provoke them to war, for I will not give you any of their land as a possession, because I have given Ar to the descendants of Lot as their possession."
5:2:9:(The Emim used to live there, a people strong and numerous, as tall as the Anakim.
5:2:10:Like the Anakim, they are considered Rephaim, but the Moabites call them Emim.
5:2:11:The Horites also lived in Seir previously, but the descendants of Esau drove them out. They destroyed the Horites from before them and settled in their place, just as Israel did in the land the Lord gave them as their possession.)
5:2:12:Now rise up and cross over the brook Zered." So we crossed over the brook Zered.
5:2:13:The time we spent traveling from Kadesh-barnea until we crossed the brook Zered was thirty-eight years, until the entire generation of fighting men had perished from the camp, as the Lord had sworn to them.
5:2:14:Indeed, the Lord's hand was against them, to eliminate them from the camp, until they were all gone.
5:2:15:When all the fighting men among the people had died,
5:2:16:the Lord spoke to me, saying,
5:2:17:"Today you are to pass through the territory of Ar, the border of Moab.
5:2:18:When you come near the Ammonites, do not harass or provoke them to war, for I will not give you any of the land of the Ammonites as a possession; I have given it to the descendants of Lot as their possession."
5:2:19:(That too was considered a land of the Rephaim, who used to live there; but the Ammonites called them Zamzummim,
5:2:20:a great and numerous people, tall as the Anakim. However, the Lord destroyed them before the Ammonites, who drove them out and settled in their place.
5:2:21:He did the same for the descendants of Esau, who live in Seir, when He destroyed the Horites before them. They drove them out and have lived in their place to this day.
5:2:22:And the Avvim, who lived in villages as far as Gaza, were destroyed by the Caphtorim, who came from Caphtor and settled in their place.)
5:2:23:"Now get ready and cross the Wadi Arnon. See, I have handed over to you Sihon the Amorite, king of Heshbon, and his land. Begin your conquest and provoke him to war.
5:2:24:Today I will begin to put the dread and fear of you on all the nations under heaven. They will hear the reports about you and tremble with anguish because of you."
5:2:25:So I sent messengers from the wilderness of Kedemoth to Sihon king of Heshbon with an offer of peace, saying,
5:2:26:"Let us pass through your land. We will stay on the main road; we will not turn aside to the right or to the left.
5:2:27:You can sell us food to eat and water to drink for money; we only want to pass through on foot,
5:2:28:just as the descendants of Esau who live in Seir and the Moabites who live in Ar did for us, until we cross the Jordan into the land the Lord our God is giving us."
5:2:29:But Sihon king of Heshbon would not let us pass through, for the Lord your God had made his spirit stubborn and his heart obstinate in order to deliver him into your hands, as He has now done.
5:2:30:The Lord said to me, "See, I have begun to deliver Sihon and his land over to you. Now begin the conquest and take possession of his land."
5:2:31:Then Sihon and all his people came out to meet us in battle at Jahaz.
5:2:32:But the Lord our God delivered him over to us, and we defeated him, his sons, and all his people.
5:2:33:At that time, we captured all his cities and completely destroyed every city—men, women, and children. We left no survivors.
5:2:34:We took only the livestock and the plunder from the cities as spoils for ourselves.
5:2:35:There was no city too strong for us; the Lord our God delivered them all to us.
5:2:36:However, you did not go near the land of the Ammonites, along the Wadi Jabbok or to the cities in the hill country, nor anywhere the Lord our God had forbidden.
5:3:1:We had previously defeated King Sihon of the Amorites, who ruled in Heshbon, and King Og of Bashan, who ruled in Ashtaroth and Edrei.
5:3:2:At that time, we took possession of their land, from the Arnon River to Mount Hermon.
5:3:3:All the cities of the plain, the entire Gilead region, and all of Bashan as far as Salecah and Edrei were also included.
5:3:4:Og, king of Bashan, was one of the last remaining giants. His iron bedstead was more than thirteen feet long and six feet wide; it can still be seen in the Ammonite city of Rabbah.
5:3:5:I divided the conquered land among the tribes of Reuben, Gad, and the half-tribe of Manasseh.
5:3:6:The territory extended from Aroer on the edge of the Arnon Valley, including the city in the middle of the valley, and the entire plain of Medeba as far as Dibon.
5:3:7:It also included all the cities of King Sihon in the land of the Amorites, who ruled from Heshbon to the border of the Ammonites.
5:3:8:Furthermore, we took possession of the Gilead region, the territory of the Rephaim, and all of Bashan, the kingdom of Og, including the entire Argob region.
5:3:9:Mount Hermon was called Sirion by the Sidonians, while the Amorites referred to it as Senir.
5:3:10:We captured all the cities of the plateau, all of Gilead, and all of Bashan, as far as Salecah and Edrei, which were part of Og's kingdom.
5:3:11:Only King Og of Bashan remained from the giants. We defeated him and his people, leaving no survivors.
5:3:12:At that time, I assigned the land as follows: The Reubenites and Gadites received the territory from Aroer by the Arnon Gorge, including half the hill country of Gilead, along with its towns.
5:3:13:The half-tribe of Manasseh was given the rest of Gilead and all of Bashan, Og's former kingdom. The entire Argob region in Bashan was known as the land of the Rephaim.
5:3:14:Jair, a descendant of Manasseh, took the entire Argob region as far as the border of the Geshurites and Maacathites. He named the area after himself, calling it Havvoth-jair, which means "the villages of Jair."
5:3:15:Moses gave Gilead to Machir, a descendant of Manasseh.
5:3:16:To the tribes of Reuben and Gad, Moses assigned the territory from Gilead down to the Arnon Valley, with the middle of the valley serving as the border, extending to the Jabbok River, the border of the Ammonites.
5:3:17:The Arabah and the Jordan River formed the boundary, from Chinnereth to the Sea of the Arabah, also known as the Dead Sea, under the slopes of Pisgah on the east.
5:3:18:At that time, I commanded you, saying, "The Lord your God has given you this land to possess. All your men of valor must cross over, armed, ahead of your fellow Israelites.
5:3:19:Your wives, children, and livestock (I know you have much livestock) may remain in the cities I have given you.
5:3:20:But your fighting men must help your fellow Israelites conquer their territory until the Lord gives them rest, just as He has done for you. Then they too can settle in the land that the Lord your God is giving them on the other side of the Jordan River."
5:3:21:At that time, I also instructed Joshua, saying, "You have seen with your own eyes all that the Lord your God has done to these two kings. The Lord will do the same to all the kingdoms across the Jordan where you are going.
5:3:22:Do not be afraid of them, for the Lord your God Himself will fight for you."
5:3:23:Then I pleaded with the Lord, saying,
5:3:24:"O Sovereign Lord, You have begun to show Your greatness and Your strong hand to Your servant. There is no god in heaven or on earth who can perform such mighty deeds as You.
5:3:25:Please let me cross over and see the beautiful land on the other side of the Jordan River, that splendid hill country and the Lebanon."
5:3:26:But the Lord was angry with me because of you, and He would not listen to me. Instead, He said, "Enough! Do not speak to Me anymore about this matter.
5:3:27:Go up to the top of Pisgah and look west, north, south, and east. Take a good look at the land with your own eyes, for you will not cross the Jordan River.
5:3:28:However, commission Joshua and encourage him. Strengthen his resolve, for he will lead this people across the Jordan and help them inherit the land that you will only see from a distance."
5:3:29:So we stayed in the valley near Beth-peor.
5:4:1:Listen now, Israel, to the laws and rules I am teaching you. Obey them so that you may live, enter and take possession of the land that the Lord, the God of your ancestors, is giving you.
5:4:2:Don't add or subtract anything from what I command you today. Follow these commands of the Lord your God exactly.
5:4:3:You saw with your own eyes what the Lord did at Baal Peor. The Lord your God destroyed everyone who followed the false god Baal of Peor.
5:4:4:But you who remained faithful to the Lord your God are still alive today.
5:4:5:Look, I have taught you laws and rules as the Lord my God commanded me, so that you may follow them in the land you are entering to take possession of it.
5:4:6:Observe them carefully, for this will show your wisdom and understanding to the nations, who will hear about all these decrees and say, "Surely this great nation is wise and understanding."
5:4:7:For what other nation has a god as close to them as the Lord our God is to us whenever we call on him?
5:4:8:And what other nation has such righteous laws and rules as this entire law I set before you today?
5:4:9:Be careful not to forget the things your eyes have seen, nor let them slip from your heart all the days of your life. Teach them to your children and their children after them.
5:4:10:Remember the day you stood before the Lord your God at Horeb when he said to me, "Gather the people together, and I will make them hear my words, so they may learn to fear me all the days they live on the earth, and teach their children as well."
5:4:11:You came near and stood at the foot of the mountain while it blazed with fire to the very heavens, with black clouds and deep darkness.
5:4:12:Then the Lord spoke to you out of the fire. You heard the sound of words but saw no form; there was only a voice.
5:4:13:He declared to you his covenant, which he commanded you to perform—the Ten Commandments—and wrote them on two stone tablets.
5:4:14:At that time the Lord directed me to teach you laws and rules, so that you might follow them in the land you are crossing over to possess.
5:4:15:Since you saw no form when the Lord spoke to you at Horeb out of the fire, be careful not to make for yourselves an idol in any shape, whether in the form of a man or a woman,
5:4:16:Or in the likeness of any animal on earth, any bird that flies in the air,
5:4:17:Any creature that moves along the ground, or any fish in the waters below.
5:4:18:And when you look up to the sky and see the sun, the moon, and the stars—all the heavenly array—do not be enticed into bowing down to them and worshiping things the Lord your God has apportioned to all the nations under heaven.
5:4:19:But as for you, the Lord took you and brought you out of the iron-smelting furnace, out of Egypt, to be the people of his inheritance, as you now are.
5:4:20:The Lord was angry with me because of you, and he swore that I would not cross the Jordan and enter the good land the Lord your God is giving you as your inheritance.
5:4:21:I will die in this land; I will not cross the Jordan; but you are about to cross over and take possession of that good land.
5:4:22:Be careful not to forget the covenant of the Lord your God that he made with you, and do not make for yourselves an idol in the form of anything the Lord your God has forbidden.
5:4:23:For the Lord your God is a consuming fire, a jealous God.
5:4:24:When you have children and grandchildren and have lived in the land a long time, if you then become corrupt and make any kind of idol, doing evil in the eyes of the Lord your God and arousing his anger,
5:4:25:I call heaven and earth as witnesses against you this day that you will quickly perish from the land that you are crossing the Jordan to possess. You will not live there long but will certainly be destroyed.
5:4:26:The Lord will scatter you among the peoples, and only a few of you will survive among the nations to which the Lord will drive you.
5:4:27:There you will worship man-made gods of wood and stone, which cannot see or hear or eat or smell.
5:4:28:But if from there you seek the Lord your God, you will find him if you seek him with all your heart and with all your soul.
5:4:29:When you are in distress and all these things have happened to you, then in later days you will return to the Lord your God and obey him.
5:4:30:For the Lord your God is a merciful God; he will not abandon or destroy you or forget the covenant with your ancestors, which he confirmed to them by oath.
5:4:31:Ask now about the former days, long before your time, from the day God created human beings on the earth; ask from one end of the heavens to the other. Has anything so great as this ever happened, or has anything like it ever been heard of?
5:4:32:Has any other people heard the voice of God speaking out of fire, as you have, and lived?
5:4:33:Has any god ever tried to take for himself one nation out of another nation, by miracles, signs, wonders, war, a mighty hand and an outstretched arm, or by great and awesome deeds, like all the things the Lord your God did for you in Egypt before your very eyes?
5:4:34:You were shown these things so that you might know that the Lord is God; besides him there is no other.
5:4:35:From heaven he made you hear his voice to discipline you. On earth he showed you his great fire, and you heard his words from out of the fire.
5:4:36:Because he loved your ancestors and chose their descendants after them, he brought you out of Egypt by his Presence and his great strength,
5:4:37:To drive out before you nations greater and stronger than you and to bring you into their land to give it to you for your inheritance, as it is today.
5:4:38:Acknowledge and take to heart this day that the Lord is God in heaven above and on the earth below. There is no other.
5:4:39:Keep his decrees and commands, which I am giving you today, so that it may go well with you and your children after you and that you may live long in the land the Lord your God gives you for all time.
5:4:40:Moses set aside three cities east of the Jordan,
5:4:41:To which anyone who had killed a person could flee if they had unintentionally killed a neighbor without malice aforethought. They could flee into one of these cities and save their life:
5:4:42:Bezer in the wilderness plateau, for the Reubenites; Ramoth in Gilead, for the Gadites; and Golan in Bashan, for the Manassites.
5:4:43:This is the law Moses set before the Israelites.
5:4:44:These are the stipulations, decrees, and laws Moses gave them when they came out of Egypt
5:4:45:And were in the valley near Beth Peor east of the Jordan, in the land of Sihon king of the Amorites, who reigned in Heshbon and was defeated by Moses and the Israelites as they came out of Egypt.
5:4:46:They took possession of his land and the land of Og king of Bashan, the two Amorite kings east of the Jordan.
5:4:47:This was the territory extending from Aroer on the rim of the Arnon Gorge to Mount Sion (that is, Hermon),
5:4:48:And included all the Arabah east of the Jordan, as far as the Dead Sea, below the slopes of Pisgah.
5:5:1:Moses called out to all the people of Israel and said, "Listen carefully to the laws and regulations I am teaching you today, so that you may learn and obey them.
5:5:2:The LORD our God made a covenant with us at Mount Sinai.
5:5:3:This covenant wasn't made only with our ancestors but also with us, who are alive here today.
5:5:4:God spoke to you face to face from the heart of the fire on the mountain.
5:5:5:At that time, I stood between the LORD and you to convey His message to you because you were afraid of the fire and did not go up the mountain. He said:
5:5:6:"I am the LORD your God, who brought you out of Egypt, where you were slaves.
5:5:7:You shall have no other gods before me.
5:5:8:Do not make any idols or images of anything in the heavens, on the earth, or in the waters below.
5:5:9:Do not bow down or worship them, for I, the LORD your God, am a jealous God. I punish the children for the sins of their parents to the third and fourth generations of those who reject me,
5:5:10:but I show love to thousands of generations of those who love me and keep my commandments.
5:5:11:Do not misuse the name of the LORD your God, for the LORD will not hold anyone guiltless who misuses his name.
5:5:12:Observe the Sabbath day and keep it holy, as the LORD your God has commanded you.
5:5:13:You have six days each week to do your work,
5:5:14:but the seventh day is a Sabbath to the LORD your God. On that day, you must not do any work—neither you, your son or daughter, your male or female servant, your ox or donkey, nor any of your livestock, nor the foreigner living within your gates, so that your servants may rest as you do.
5:5:15:Remember that you were slaves in Egypt and that the LORD your God brought you out with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm. Therefore, the LORD your God has commanded you to observe the Sabbath day.
5:5:16:Honor your father and mother, as the LORD your God has commanded you, so that you may live long and be blessed in the land the LORD your God is giving you.
5:5:17:Do not murder.
5:5:18:Do not commit adultery.
5:5:19:Do not steal.
5:5:20:Do not give false testimony against your neighbor.
5:5:21:Do not covet your neighbor's wife. Do not desire your neighbor's house, his field, his male or female servant, his ox or donkey, or anything that belongs to your neighbor."
5:5:22:These are the words the LORD spoke to all your assembly at the mountain from the midst of the fire, the cloud, and the thick darkness, with a loud voice; He added no more. He wrote them on two stone tablets and gave them to me.
5:5:23:When you heard the voice coming from the darkness while the mountain was ablaze with fire, all the leaders of your tribes and your elders approached me,
5:5:24:and said, "We have seen that the LORD our God has shown us His glory and greatness, and we have heard His voice from the heart of the fire. Today we have seen that a person can live even if God speaks with them.
5:5:25:But now, why should we die? This great fire will consume us, and if we continue to hear the voice of the LORD our God any longer, we will die.
5:5:26:For what mortal has ever heard the voice of the living God speaking out of the fire, as we have, and survived?
5:5:27:You go near and listen to all that the LORD our God says. Then tell us whatever the LORD our God tells you. We will listen and obey."
5:5:28:The LORD heard your words when you spoke to me, and He said to me, "I have heard the words these people have spoken to you. Everything they have said is right.
5:5:29:If only their hearts would always have this desire to fear me and obey all my commandments, so that they and their descendants might prosper forever!
5:5:30:Go and tell them to return to their tents.
5:5:31:But you stay here with me so that I may give you all the commands, laws, and regulations you must teach them to follow in the land I am giving them as their possession."
5:5:32:So be careful to do what the LORD your God has commanded you; do not turn aside to the right or to the left.
5:5:33:Walk in obedience to all that the LORD your God has commanded you, so that you may live and prosper and prolong your days in the land that you will possess.
5:6:1:These are the commandments, decrees, and regulations that the Lord your God commanded me to teach you, so you may obey them in the land you're about to enter and occupy.
5:6:2:This way, you, your children, and your grandchildren will fear the Lord your God and follow all His instructions as long as you live, ensuring a long life for you.
5:6:3:Hear this, Israel, and be careful to obey these laws, so that things go well for you, and you multiply greatly in a land flowing with milk and honey, just as the Lord, the God of your ancestors, has promised you.
5:6:4:Listen, Israel: The Lord our God, the Lord is one.
5:6:5:Love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, and with all your strength.
5:6:6:Always keep these commands I am giving you today in your mind.
5:6:7:Teach them diligently to your children, talking about them when you sit at home, when you walk along the road, when you lie down, and when you rise up.
5:6:8:Bind them as a sign on your hand and let them serve as a symbol on your forehead.
5:6:9:Write them on the doorposts of your house and on your gates.
5:6:10:When the Lord your God brings you into the land He swore to your ancestors, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to give you—a land with large, flourishing cities you did not build,
5:6:11:houses filled with all kinds of good things you did not provide, wells you did not dig, and vineyards and olive groves you did not plant—then when you eat and are satisfied,
5:6:12:be careful not to forget the Lord who brought you out of Egypt, out of the land of slavery.
5:6:13:Fear the Lord your God, serve Him only, and take your oaths in His name.
5:6:14:Do not follow other gods, the gods of the peoples around you,
5:6:15:for the Lord your God, who is among you, is a jealous God, and His anger will burn against you, and He will destroy you from the face of the land.
5:6:16:Do not put the Lord your God to the test as you did at Massah.
5:6:17:Be sure to keep the commandments of the Lord your God and the stipulations and decrees He has given you.
5:6:18:Do what is right and good in the Lord's sight, so that it may go well with you and you may enter and take possession of the good land the Lord promised on oath to your ancestors,
5:6:19:thrusting out all your enemies before you, as the Lord said.
5:6:20:In the future, when your son asks you, "What is the meaning of the stipulations, decrees, and laws the Lord our God has commanded you?"
5:6:21:tell him: "We were slaves of Pharaoh in Egypt, but the Lord brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand.
5:6:22:Before our eyes, the Lord sent signs and wonders—great and terrible—on Egypt and Pharaoh and his whole household.
5:6:23:But He brought us out from there to bring us in and give us the land He promised on oath to our ancestors.
5:6:24:The Lord commanded us to obey all these decrees and to fear the Lord our God, so that we might always prosper and be kept alive, as is the case today.
5:6:25:And if we are careful to obey all this law before the Lord our God, as He has commanded us, that will be our righteousness."
5:7:1:When the LORD your God brings you into the land you are entering to possess, and drives out before you many nations—the Hittites, Girgashites, Amorites, Canaanites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites, seven nations larger and stronger than you—
5:7:2:and when the LORD your God has delivered them over to you and you have defeated them, then you must destroy them totally. Make no treaty with them and show them no mercy.
5:7:3:Do not intermarry with them. Do not give your daughters to their sons or take their daughters for your sons,
5:7:4:for they will turn your children away from following me to serve other gods, and the LORD's anger will burn against you and quickly destroy you.
5:7:5:Instead, this is what you are to do to them: tear down their altars, smash their sacred stones, cut down their Asherah poles, and burn their idols in the fire.
5:7:6:For you are a people holy to the LORD your God. The LORD your God has chosen you to be his treasured possession, out of all the peoples on the face of the earth.
5:7:7:The LORD did not set his affection on you and choose you because you were more numerous than other peoples, for you were the fewest of all peoples.
5:7:8:But it was because the LORD loved you and kept the oath he swore to your ancestors that he brought you out with a mighty hand and redeemed you from the land of slavery, from the power of Pharaoh king of Egypt.
5:7:9:Know therefore that the LORD your God is God; he is the faithful God, keeping his covenant of love to a thousand generations of those who love him and keep his commandments.
5:7:10:But those who hate him he will repay to their face by destruction; he will not be slow to repay to their face those who hate him.
5:7:11:So, be sure to follow the commands, decrees, and laws I am giving you today.
5:7:12:If you pay attention to these laws and are careful to follow them, then the LORD your God will keep his covenant of love with you, as he swore to your ancestors.
5:7:13:He will love you, bless you, and multiply you. He will also bless the fruit of your womb and the crops of your land—your grain, new wine, and oil—the calves of your herds and the lambs of your flocks in the land he swore to your ancestors to give you.
5:7:14:You will be blessed more than any other people; none of your men or women will be childless, nor will any of your livestock be without young.
5:7:15:The LORD will keep you free from every disease. He will not inflict on you the horrible diseases you knew in Egypt, but he will inflict them on all who hate you.
5:7:16:You must destroy all the peoples the LORD your God gives over to you. Do not look on them with pity and do not serve their gods, for that will be a snare to you.
5:7:17:You may say to yourselves, "These nations are stronger than we are. How can we drive them out?"
5:7:18:But do not be afraid of them; remember well what the LORD your God did to Pharaoh and to all Egypt.
5:7:19:You saw with your own eyes the great trials, the signs and wonders, the mighty hand and outstretched arm, with which the LORD your God brought you out. The LORD your God will do the same to all the peoples you now fear.
5:7:20:Moreover, the LORD your God will send the hornet among them until even the survivors who hide from you have perished.
5:7:21:Do not be terrified by them, for the LORD your God, who is among you, is a great and awesome God.
5:7:22:The LORD your God will drive out those nations before you, little by little. You will not be allowed to eliminate them all at once, or the wild animals will multiply around you.
5:7:23:But the LORD your God will deliver them over to you, throwing them into great confusion until they are destroyed.
5:7:24:He will give their kings into your hand, and you will wipe out their names from under heaven. No one will be able to stand up against you; you will destroy them.
5:7:25:The images of their gods you are to burn in the fire. Do not covet the silver and gold on them
5:7:26:and do not take it for yourselves, or you will be ensnared by it, for it is detestable to the LORD your God.
5:7:27:Do not bring a detestable thing into your house or you, like it, will be set apart for destruction. Regard it as vile and utterly detest it, for it is set apart for destruction.
5:8:1:Always remember the entire journey that the Lord your God has led you on these past forty years in the wilderness. He did this to humble and test you, so that he might know what's in your heart—whether you would obey his commands or not.
5:8:2:He humbled you, causing you to be hungry, then fed you with manna, a food unknown to you and your ancestors. He did this to teach you that people don't live by bread alone, but by every word that comes from the mouth of the Lord.
5:8:3:Your clothes didn't wear out, and your feet didn't swell during these forty years.
5:8:4:Understand in your heart that just as a parent disciplines their child, the Lord your God disciplines you.
5:8:5:So keep the commandments of the Lord your God, walking in his ways and fearing him.
5:8:6:For the Lord your God is bringing you into a good land—a land with streams and pools of water, springs flowing in the valleys and hills;
5:8:7:a land with wheat and barley, vines and fig trees, pomegranates, olive oil, and honey;
5:8:8:a land where you'll eat food without scarcity, and where you'll lack nothing; a land where the rocks are iron and you can dig copper from the hills.
5:8:9:When you have eaten and are satisfied, praise the Lord your God for the good land he has given you.
5:8:10:Be careful not to forget the Lord your God, failing to observe his commandments, laws, and decrees that I'm giving you today.
5:8:11:Otherwise, when you eat and are satisfied, build fine houses and settle down,
5:8:12:and your herds and flocks grow large, and your silver and gold increase, and all you have multiplies,
5:8:13:then your heart will become proud, and you'll forget the Lord your God, who brought you out of Egypt, out of the land of slavery.
5:8:14:He led you through the vast and dreadful wilderness, with its venomous snakes and scorpions, a thirsty and waterless land. He brought water for you out of hard rock.
5:8:15:He fed you in the wilderness with manna, which your ancestors had never known, to humble and test you so that in the end it might go well with you.
5:8:16:You may say to yourself, "My power and the strength of my hands have produced this wealth for me."
5:8:17:But remember the Lord your God, for it is he who gives you the ability to produce wealth, and so confirms his covenant, which he swore to your ancestors, as it is today.
5:8:18:If you ever forget the Lord your God and follow other gods, worshiping and bowing down to them, I testify against you today that you will surely be destroyed.
5:8:19:Like the nations the Lord destroys before you, so you will be destroyed for not obeying the Lord your God.
5:9:1:Listen up, Israel! Today you're about to cross the Jordan River and enter the land of nations that are stronger and larger than you. Their cities have high walls reaching the sky.
5:9:2:These people are powerful and tall, descendants of the Anakites. You know about them, and you've heard it said, "Who can stand against the descendants of Anak?"
5:9:3:But remember, the Lord your God is going with you. He's a consuming fire, and he'll destroy them. He'll help you conquer them, and you'll quickly drive them out, just as he promised.
5:9:4:After the Lord your God has driven them out for you, don't start thinking, "I'm so great! The Lord brought me here to take this land because I'm such a good person." No, it's because these nations are wicked that the Lord is driving them out ahead of you.
5:9:5:It's not because you're righteous or have a pure heart that you're going in to take their land. The Lord your God is driving these nations out because they're evil, and to keep the promise he made to your ancestors, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
5:9:6:Understand this: The Lord your God isn't giving you this good land because you're so righteous. You're stubborn people!
5:9:7:Don't forget how you made the Lord your God angry in the wilderness. From the day you left Egypt until you arrived here, you've been rebelling against him.
5:9:8:Even at Horeb, you provoked the Lord, and he was so angry with you that he wanted to destroy you.
5:9:9:When I went up the mountain to receive the stone tablets with the covenant the Lord made with you, I stayed on the mountain for forty days and nights without eating or drinking.
5:9:10:The Lord gave me two stone tablets written by his own finger, with all the words he spoke to you on the mountain from the midst of the fire on the day we gathered there.
5:9:11:At the end of those forty days and nights, the Lord handed me the two stone tablets—the tablets of the covenant.
5:9:12:Then the Lord said to me, "Get up and go down from here quickly, because your people whom you led out of Egypt have acted corruptly. They've already turned away from the path I commanded them to follow, and they've made an idol for themselves."
5:9:13:The Lord also told me, "I've seen these people, and they're indeed stubborn.
5:9:14:Leave me alone so I can destroy them and erase their name from under heaven. Then I'll make you into a nation that's stronger and more numerous than they are."
5:9:15:So I turned and went down from the mountain while it was still on fire. The two tablets of the covenant were in my hands.
5:9:16:When I saw how you had sinned against the Lord your God by making a calf—an idol cast in metal—you had quickly turned away from the path the Lord had commanded you to follow.
5:9:17:I took hold of the two tablets and threw them out of my hands, breaking them before your eyes.
5:9:18:Then I fell down before the Lord, as I did the first time, for forty days and nights without eating or drinking, because of all the sin you had committed by doing evil in the Lord's sight and provoking him to anger.
5:9:19:I was afraid that the Lord's anger and wrath were so intense that he would destroy you. But again, the Lord listened to me.
5:9:20:The Lord was angry enough with Aaron to destroy him, but I prayed for Aaron at that time too.
5:9:21:I took the sinful calf you had made, burned it in the fire, crushed it into fine powder, and scattered the powder on the stream flowing down from the mountain.
5:9:22:You also provoked the Lord to anger at Taberah, Massah, and Kibroth-hattaavah.
5:9:23:And when the Lord sent you out from Kadesh-barnea, saying, "Go up and take possession of the land I've given you," you rebelled against the command of the Lord your God, and you didn't trust or obey him.
5:9:24:From the day I first knew you, you've been rebelling against the Lord.
5:10:1:At that time, the LORD told me, 'Carve out two stone tablets like the first ones and come up to me on the mountain. Also make a wooden ark.
5:10:2:I will write on the tablets the words that were on the first tablets, which you broke, and you shall place them in the ark.'
5:10:3:So I made an ark of acacia wood, carved out two stone tablets like the first ones, and went up the mountain with the two tablets in my hands.
5:10:4:He then wrote on the tablets the same words as before, the Ten Commandments that the LORD had spoken to you on the mountain from the midst of the fire on the day of the assembly; and the LORD gave them to me.
5:10:5:Then I turned and came down from the mountain and placed the tablets in the ark I had made. They are there, just as the LORD commanded me.
5:10:6:The Israelites traveled from the wells of the Bene-jaakan to Moserah. Aaron died there and was buried, and Eleazar his son succeeded him as priest.
5:10:7:From there they journeyed to Gudgodah, and from Gudgodah to Jotbathah, a land with streams of water.
5:10:8:At that time, the LORD set apart the tribe of Levi to carry the ark of the covenant of the LORD, to stand before the LORD to serve Him, and to bless in His name, as they still do today.
5:10:9:Therefore, Levi has no portion or inheritance with his brothers; the LORD is his inheritance, as the LORD your God said to him.
5:10:10:Now I stayed on the mountain forty days and forty nights, as I did the first time, and the LORD listened to me again. He did not want to destroy you.
5:10:11:'Go,' the LORD said to me, 'lead the people on their way so they may enter and possess the land I swore to their ancestors to give them.'
5:10:12:And now, Israel, what does the LORD your God require of you? To fear the LORD your God, to walk in all His ways, to love Him, to serve the LORD your God with all your heart and with all your soul,
5:10:13:and to keep the commandments and statutes of the LORD, which I am commanding you today for your own good.
5:10:14:Behold, the heavens and the highest heavens belong to the LORD your God, as well as the earth and everything in it.
5:10:15:Yet the LORD set His affection on your ancestors and loved them, and He chose you, their descendants, above all peoples, as it is today.
5:10:16:Circumcise your hearts, therefore, and do not be stiff-necked any longer.
5:10:17:For the LORD your God is God of gods and Lord of lords, the great, mighty, and awesome God, who shows no partiality and accepts no bribes.
5:10:18:He executes justice for the orphan and the widow, and loves the foreigner residing among you, giving them food and clothing.
5:10:19:So you also must love the foreigner, since you yourselves were foreigners in the land of Egypt.
5:10:20:Fear the LORD your God, serve Him, hold fast to Him, and take your oaths in His name.
5:10:21:He is your praise and He is your God, who performed for you those great and awesome wonders you saw with your own eyes.
5:10:22:Your ancestors went down to Egypt, seventy in all, and now the LORD your God has made you as numerous as the stars in the sky.
5:11:1:Love the Lord your God and always follow His commands, laws, and regulations.
5:11:2:Remember today that it wasn't your children who experienced and learned to respect the Lord your God's discipline. They didn't witness the miracles He performed.
5:11:3:Your own eyes saw the great trials, signs, and wonders He did.
5:11:4:But the Lord didn't give you a mind to understand, eyes to see, or ears to hear until now.
5:11:5:I led you through the wilderness for forty years, and your clothes didn't wear out, nor did your sandals.
5:11:6:You ate no bread and drank no wine or other fermented drink, so you would know that I am the Lord your God.
5:11:7:When we came to this place, Sihon king of Heshbon and Og king of Bashan came out to fight against us, but we defeated them.
5:11:8:We took their land and gave it as an inheritance to the tribes of Reuben, Gad, and half the tribe of Manasseh.
5:11:9:Observe, therefore, all the commands I am giving you today, so that you may have the strength to go in and take over the land that you are crossing the Jordan to possess.
5:11:10:The land you are entering to take over is not like the land of Egypt, from which you have come, where you planted your seed and irrigated it by foot as in a vegetable garden.
5:11:11:Instead, the land you are crossing the Jordan to occupy is a land of hills and valleys, drinking water from the rain of heaven.
5:11:12:It's a land the Lord your God cares for; the eyes of the Lord your God are always on it, from the beginning of the year to its end.
5:11:13:So if you faithfully obey the commands I am giving you today—to love the Lord your God and serve Him with all your heart and with all your soul—
5:11:14:He will send rain for your land in its season, both autumn and spring rains, so that you may gather in your grain, new wine, and olive oil.
5:11:15:He will provide grass in the fields for your cattle, and you will eat and be satisfied.
5:11:16:Be careful, or you will be enticed to turn away and worship other gods and bow down to them.
5:11:17:Then the Lord's anger will burn against you, and He will shut up the heavens so that it will not rain, and the ground will yield no produce. You will soon perish from the good land the Lord is giving you.
5:11:18:Fix these words of mine in your hearts and minds; tie them as symbols on your hands and bind them on your foreheads.
5:11:19:Teach them to your children, talking about them when you sit at home and when you walk along the road, when you lie down and when you get up.
5:11:20:Write them on the doorframes of your houses and on your gates,
5:11:21:so that your days and the days of your children may be many in the land the Lord swore to give your ancestors, as many as the days that the heavens are above the earth.
5:11:22:If you carefully observe all these commands I am giving you to follow—to love the Lord your God, to walk in obedience to Him and to hold fast to Him—
5:11:23:then the Lord will drive out all these nations before you, and you will dispossess nations larger and stronger than you.
5:11:24:Every place where you set your foot will be yours: from the desert to Lebanon, and from the Euphrates River to the Mediterranean Sea, no one will be able to stand against you.
5:11:25:The Lord your God, as He promised you, will put the terror and fear of you on the whole land, wherever you go.
5:11:26:See, I am setting before you today a blessing and a curse—
5:11:27:a blessing if you obey the commands of the Lord your God that I am giving you today;
5:11:28:and a curse if you disobey the commands of the Lord your God and turn from the way that I command you today by following other gods, which you have not known.
5:11:29:When the Lord your God has brought you into the land you are entering to possess, you are to proclaim on Mount Gerizim the blessings, and on Mount Ebal the curses.
5:11:30:These mountains are west of the Jordan, beyond the road that leads to the sunset, in the land of the Canaanites living in the Arabah near Gilgal, beside the great trees of Moreh.
5:11:31:For you are about to cross the Jordan to enter and take possession of the land the Lord your God is giving you. When you have taken it over and are living there,
5:11:32:be sure to follow all the decrees and laws I am setting before you today.
5:12:1:These are the rules and guidelines you must follow in the land that the LORD, the God of your ancestors, is giving you to possess, for as long as you live on earth.
5:12:2:You must destroy all the places where the nations you're driving out worship their gods—on the high mountains, hills, and under every green tree.
5:12:3:Break down their altars, smash their sacred stones, burn their Asherah poles, and cut down the idols of their gods, so that their names will be forgotten forever.
5:12:4:Don't worship the LORD your God in the same way they do.
5:12:5:Instead, seek the place the LORD your God chooses from among all your tribes to put His Name for His dwelling, and go there.
5:12:6:Bring your burnt offerings, sacrifices, tithes, special gifts, and offerings in fulfillment of a vow, along with your freewill offerings and the firstborn of your herds and flocks.
5:12:7:There, in the presence of the LORD your God, you and your families will eat and rejoice in everything you've put your hand to, because the LORD your God has blessed you.
5:12:8:Don't behave like you did before, when everyone did what they thought was right.
5:12:9:For you haven't yet arrived at the resting place and the inheritance the LORD your God is giving you.
5:12:10:But when you cross the Jordan River and settle in the land the LORD your God is giving you as an inheritance, He will give you rest from all your enemies around you, and you'll live in safety.
5:12:11:At that time, bring everything I command you—your burnt offerings, sacrifices, tithes, special gifts, and offerings in fulfillment of a vow—to the place the LORD your God chooses for His Name to dwell.
5:12:12:Rejoice in the presence of the LORD your God with your sons, daughters, male and female servants, and the Levites from your towns who have no land of their own.
5:12:13:Be careful not to offer your burnt offerings just anywhere you see,
5:12:14:but only in the place the LORD chooses in one of your tribes. There, you must offer your burnt offerings and do everything I command you.
5:12:15:However, you may slaughter and eat meat within any of your towns, as much as you desire, according to the blessing the LORD your God has given you. Both the ceremonially clean and unclean may eat it, as they would gazelle or deer.
5:12:16:But you must not consume the blood; pour it out on the ground like water.
5:12:17:You cannot eat in your towns the tithe of your grain, new wine, olive oil, firstborn of your herds and flocks, any offerings in fulfillment of a vow, or your freewill offerings.
5:12:18:Instead, you must eat them in the presence of the LORD your God at the place He chooses—you, your sons, daughters, male and female servants, and the Levites from your towns—and rejoice before the LORD your God in everything you undertake.
5:12:19:Be sure not to neglect the Levites as long as you live in your land.
5:12:20:When the LORD your God expands your territory as He promised, and you crave meat and say, "I want to eat meat," you may eat as much meat as you desire.
5:12:21:If the place the LORD your God chooses to put His Name is too far away, you may slaughter animals from the herds and flocks He has given you, as I have commanded you, and eat them in your towns whenever you want.
5:12:22:You may eat them just as you would gazelle or deer; both the ceremonially clean and unclean may eat together.
5:12:23:But be sure not to eat the blood, because the blood is the life, and you must not eat the life with the meat.
5:12:24:Don't consume the blood; pour it out on the ground like water.
5:12:25:Don't eat it, so that things may go well for you and your children after you when you do what's right in the eyes of the LORD.
5:12:26:Take your holy things and your offerings in fulfillment of a vow to the place the LORD chooses.
5:12:27:Present your burnt offerings on the altar of the LORD your God, both the meat and the blood. The blood of your sacrifices must be poured beside the altar of the LORD your God, but you may eat the meat.
5:12:28:Be careful to obey all these words I'm commanding you, so that it may always go well with you and your children after you when you do what is good and right in the eyes of the LORD your God.
5:12:29:When the LORD your God has cut off before you the nations you're entering to dispossess, and you've driven them out and settled in their land,
5:12:30:be careful not to be ensnared by following their customs after they've been destroyed. Don't inquire about their gods, asking, "How did these nations serve their gods? I'll do the same."
5:12:31:Don't worship the LORD your God in their way, because everything they do for their gods is detestable to the LORD. He hates it when they even burn their sons and daughters as sacrifices to their gods.
5:12:32:Make sure to do everything I command you; don't add anything or take anything away.
5:13:1:If a prophet or someone who has dreams appears among you and announces a sign or wonder to you,
5:13:2:and if the sign or wonder they told you about comes true, but they urge you to follow other gods—gods you haven't known before—and to worship them,
5:13:3:don't listen to that prophet or dreamer. The Lord your God is testing you to find out whether you truly love him with all your heart and soul.
5:13:4:You must follow the Lord your God, fear him, obey his commands, and listen to his voice. Serve and cling to him.
5:13:5:That prophet or dreamer must be put to death because they tried to turn you away from the Lord your God, who brought you out of Egypt and redeemed you from slavery. They were attempting to lead you astray from the path the Lord your God commanded you to follow. You must purge the evil from among you.
5:13:6:If your brother, son, daughter, beloved wife, or closest friend secretly entices you, saying, "Let's go and worship other gods"—gods neither you nor your ancestors have known,
5:13:7:gods from the peoples around you, whether near or far, from one end of the earth to the other—
5:13:8:don't give in or listen to them. Show no pity or compassion, and do not protect them.
5:13:9:Instead, you must surely kill them. Your hand should be the first to strike them, followed by the hands of all the people.
5:13:10:Stone them to death, for they tried to turn you away from the Lord your God, who brought you out of Egypt, out of the land of slavery.
5:13:11:Then all Israel will hear and be afraid, and no one among you will ever do such an evil thing again.
5:13:12:If you hear it said about one of the towns the Lord your God is giving you to live in,
5:13:13:that some scoundrels have arisen among you and led the people of their town astray, saying, "Let's go and worship other gods" (gods you haven't known),
5:13:14:you must investigate, inquire, and interrogate thoroughly. If it's true and has been proven that this detestable thing has happened among you,
5:13:15:you must certainly strike down the inhabitants of that town with the sword. Destroy it completely, along with everything in it and its livestock.
5:13:16:Gather all the plunder of the town into the middle of the public square and burn the town and all its plunder as a whole burnt offering to the Lord your God. It shall remain a ruin forever, never to be rebuilt.
5:13:17:Don't keep any of the devoted things for yourself, so that the Lord may turn from his fierce anger and show you mercy, have compassion on you, and increase your numbers, as he promised your ancestors—
5:13:18:because you obey the Lord your God by keeping all his commands that I'm giving you today and doing what's right in his eyes.
5:14:1:You are children of the Lord your God. Do not cut yourselves or shave the front of your heads for the dead,
5:14:2:for you are a people holy to the Lord your God. Out of all the peoples on the face of the earth, the Lord has chosen you to be his treasured possession.
5:14:3:Do not eat any detestable thing.
5:14:4:These are the animals you may eat: the ox, the sheep, the goat,
5:14:5:the deer, the gazelle, the roe deer, the wild goat, the ibex, the antelope, and the mountain sheep.
5:14:6:You may eat any animal that has a divided hoof and chews the cud.
5:14:7:However, do not eat these animals that chew the cud or have a divided hoof: the camel, the hare, and the hyrax. Although they chew the cud, they do not have a divided hoof; they are unclean for you.
5:14:8:The pig is also unclean; although it has a divided hoof, it does not chew the cud. You must not eat their meat or touch their carcasses.
5:14:9:Of all the creatures living in the water, you may eat any that have fins and scales.
5:14:10:But anything that does not have fins and scales you must not eat; it is unclean for you.
5:14:11:You may eat any clean bird.
5:14:12:But these birds you must not eat: the eagle, the vulture, the black vulture,
5:14:13:the red kite, the black kite, any kind of falcon,
5:14:14:any kind of raven,
5:14:15:the horned owl, the screech owl, the gull, any kind of hawk,
5:14:16:the little owl, the great owl, the white owl,
5:14:17:the desert owl, the osprey, the cormorant,
5:14:18:the stork, any kind of heron, the hoopoe, and the bat.
5:14:19:All flying insects are unclean for you; do not eat them.
5:14:20:However, you may eat any winged creature that is clean.
5:14:21:Do not eat anything you find already dead. You may give it to the foreigner residing in your towns so they can eat it, or you may sell it to any other foreigner. But you are a people holy to the Lord your God. Do not cook a young goat in its mother's milk.
5:14:22:Set aside a tenth of all your crops each year.
5:14:23:Eat the tithe of your grain, new wine, and olive oil, and the firstborn of your herds and flocks in the presence of the Lord your God at the place he will choose as a dwelling for his Name, so that you may learn to revere the Lord your God always.
5:14:24:But if that place is too distant and you have been blessed by the Lord your God and cannot carry your tithe, exchange your tithe for silver, and take the silver with you and go to the place the Lord your God will choose.
5:14:25:Use the silver to buy whatever you like: cattle, sheep, wine, or other fermented drink, or anything you wish. Then you and your household shall eat there in the presence of the Lord your God and rejoice.
5:14:26:And do not neglect the Levites living in your towns, for they have no allotment or inheritance of their own.
5:14:27:At the end of every three years, bring all the tithes of that year's produce and store it in your towns,
5:14:28:so that the Levites (who have no allotment or inheritance of their own) and the foreigners, the fatherless, and the widows who live in your towns may come and eat and be satisfied, and so that the Lord your God may bless you in all the work of your hands.
5:15:1:At the end of every seven years, you must cancel debts.
5:15:2:This is how the debt cancellation should be done: Every creditor must release any claim to what they've lent their neighbor or relative; you cannot demand repayment, for it's the Lord's time for canceling debts.
5:15:3:You may collect from a foreigner, but you must forgive any debt your fellow Israelite owes you.
5:15:4:However, there shouldn't be any poor among you, because the Lord will bless you in the land He's giving you to possess as an inheritance,
5:15:5:if only you carefully obey the Lord your God's commands, which I'm giving you today, by following them wholeheartedly.
5:15:6:For the Lord your God will bless you just as He promised, and you'll lend to many nations but won't borrow from them. You'll rule over many nations, but they won't rule over you.
5:15:7:When someone among you becomes poor, whether a fellow Israelite or a resident alien living in one of your towns, do not be hard-hearted or tight-fisted toward them.
5:15:8:Instead, be open-handed and generously lend them whatever they need.
5:15:9:Be careful not to harbor wicked thoughts like, "The seventh year, the year of debt cancellation, is near," and then become stingy toward your needy fellow Israelite, refusing to help them. They might appeal to the Lord against you, and you would be guilty of sin.
5:15:10:Give generously to them, without hesitation, and the Lord your God will bless you in all your work and everything you undertake.
5:15:11:There will always be poor people in the land. That's why I'm commanding you to be open-handed toward your fellow Israelites who are poor and needy in your land.
5:15:12:If a fellow Hebrew, man or woman, sells themselves to you as a servant, they shall serve you for six years, and in the seventh year, you must set them free.
5:15:13:When you release them, do not send them away empty-handed.
5:15:14:Supply them generously from your flock, your threshing floor, and your winepress. Give to them as the Lord your God has blessed you.
5:15:15:Remember that you were slaves in Egypt, and the Lord your God redeemed you. That's why I give you this command today.
5:15:16:But if your servant says, "I don't want to leave you," because they love you and your family and are content with their situation,
5:15:17:then take an awl and pierce their earlobe against the door, marking them as your servant for life. Do the same for your female servant.
5:15:18:Don't consider it a hardship when you set them free; they've been worth twice the value of a hired worker during their time of service. The Lord your God will bless you in all you do.
5:16:1:Celebrate the Passover to honor the Lord your God, as He commanded you, by sacrificing a Passover animal in the month of Abib. The Lord brought you out of Egypt during this time.
5:16:2:You must not sacrifice the Passover animal within any of your towns that the Lord your God is giving you.
5:16:3:Instead, offer it at the place the Lord your God chooses for His name to dwell. Sacrifice the Passover animal in the evening as the sun sets, at the same time you left Egypt.
5:16:4:Boil and eat the Passover meal at the location chosen by the Lord your God. In the morning, return to your homes.
5:16:5:For six days you shall eat unleavened bread, but on the seventh day there will be a solemn assembly to honor the Lord your God. You are not to do any work on this day.
5:16:6:Next, observe the Festival of Weeks. Count off seven weeks from the time you begin to harvest the grain.
5:16:7:Then celebrate the Festival of Weeks to honor the Lord your God by giving a freewill offering in proportion to the blessings you have received from Him.
5:16:8:Rejoice before the Lord your God with your sons, daughters, male and female servants, Levites, foreigners, orphans, and widows who live among you, at the place where the Lord your God chooses to establish His name.
5:16:9:Remember that you were slaves in Egypt, so carefully follow these decrees.
5:16:10:Lastly, celebrate the Festival of Tabernacles for seven days after you have gathered the produce from your threshing floor and winepress.
5:16:11:Be joyful during this festival, along with your sons, daughters, male and female servants, Levites, foreigners, orphans, and widows who live among you.
5:16:12:Hold this festival for seven days in honor of the Lord your God at the place He chooses. The Lord your God will bless your harvest and all your work, so you will be completely joyful.
5:16:13:You must observe these three festivals each year, dedicated to the Lord your God: the Festival of Unleavened Bread, the Festival of Weeks, and the Festival of Tabernacles. All men should appear before the Lord your God at the place He chooses, but they should not come empty-handed.
5:16:14:Each person should give as much as they can, according to the blessings the Lord your God has given them.
5:16:15:Appoint judges and officials for each of your tribes in every town the Lord your God is giving you. They must judge the people fairly.
5:16:16:Do not distort justice or show partiality. Do not accept bribes, for they blind the eyes of the wise and twist the words of the righteous.
5:16:17:Pursue justice and justice alone, so that you may live and possess the land the Lord your God is giving you.
5:16:18:Do not set up any wooden Asherah pole beside the altar you build to honor the Lord your God.
5:16:19:Also, do not erect a sacred stone, for these the Lord your God hates.
5:17:1:You must not sacrifice to the Lord your God any bull or sheep that has a defect or anything wrong with it, for that would be an insult to Him.
5:17:2:If there is a man or woman among you in any of the towns that the Lord your God gives you who does what is evil in the sight of the Lord your God by breaking His covenant,
5:17:3:and they go and serve other gods and bow down to them—gods they have not known, nor have you been allotted—
5:17:4:when it is reported to you and you hear about it, you must investigate thoroughly. If it is true and it is proven that such a detestable thing has been done in Israel,
5:17:5:then you must bring out to the gates of that town the man or woman who has done this evil thing, and stone them to death.
5:17:6:The testimony of two or three witnesses is required to put someone to death; no one may be executed on the testimony of only one witness.
5:17:7:The hands of the witnesses must be the first to put the guilty person to death, followed by the hands of all the people. In this way, you will purge the evil from among you.
5:17:8:If a case arises that is too difficult for you to judge—whether it involves bloodshed, lawsuits, or physical assaults—take it to the place the Lord your God will choose.
5:17:9:Go to the Levitical priests and the judge who is in office at that time, and present your case to them. They will examine the evidence and announce their verdict.
5:17:10:You must abide by the decision they announce to you from the place the Lord will choose, and be careful to follow their instructions exactly.
5:17:11:You must carry out the verdict they announce and the sentence they prescribe, without deviating to the right or the left from any of their decisions.
5:17:12:Anyone who shows contempt for the judge or the priest who stands ministering there to the Lord your God is to be put to death. You must purge the evil from Israel.
5:17:13:All the people will hear and be afraid, and they will not act with such arrogance again.
5:17:14:When you enter the land the Lord your God is giving you and have taken possession of it and settled in it, and you say, "Let us set a king over us like all the nations around us,"
5:17:15:be sure to appoint the king the Lord your God chooses. He must be from among your fellow Israelites; do not place a foreigner over you, one who is not an Israelite.
5:17:16:The king, moreover, must not acquire great numbers of horses for himself or make the people return to Egypt to get more of them, for the Lord has told you, "You are not to go back that way again."
5:17:17:He must not take many wives, or his heart will be led astray. He must also not accumulate large amounts of silver and gold.
5:17:18:When he takes the throne of his kingdom, he is to write for himself on a scroll a copy of this law, taken from that of the Levitical priests.
5:17:19:It is to be with him, and he is to read it all the days of his life so that he may learn to revere the Lord his God and follow carefully all the words of this law and these decrees
5:17:20:and not consider himself better than his fellow Israelites and turn from the law to the right or to the left. Then he and his descendants will reign a long time over his kingdom in Israel.
5:18:1:The Levitical priests, the whole tribe of Levi, shall have no inheritance with Israel. They will live off the offerings made to the Lord by fire, for that is their inheritance.
5:18:2:They shall have no inheritance among their fellow Israelites; the Lord is their inheritance, as he promised them.
5:18:3:This is the share due to the priests from the people who sacrifice a bull or a sheep: the shoulder, the cheeks, and the stomach.
5:18:4:You must give them the firstfruits of your grain, new wine, and oil, and the first wool from the shearing of your sheep.
5:18:5:For the Lord your God has chosen them and their descendants out of all your tribes to stand and serve in the name of the Lord always.
5:18:6:If a Levite moves from one of your towns anywhere in Israel where he is living, and comes in all earnestness to the place the Lord will choose,
5:18:7:he may minister there in the name of the Lord his God like all his fellow Levites who serve there before the Lord.
5:18:8:He is to share equally in their benefits, even though he has received money from the sale of family possessions.
5:18:9:When you enter the land the Lord your God is giving you, do not learn to imitate the detestable ways of the nations there.
5:18:10:Let no one be found among you who sacrifices their son or daughter in the fire, practices divination, interprets omens, engages in witchcraft,
5:18:11:casts spells, consults with mediums or spiritists, or inquires of the dead.
5:18:12:Anyone who does these things is detestable to the Lord; because of these same detestable practices, the Lord your God will drive out those nations before you.
5:18:13:You must be blameless before the Lord your God.
5:18:14:The nations you will dispossess listen to those who practice sorcery or divination. But as for you, the Lord your God has not permitted you to do so.
5:18:15:The Lord your God will raise up for you a prophet like me from among you, from your fellow Israelites. You must listen to him.
5:18:16:For this is what you asked of the Lord your God at Horeb on the day of the assembly when you said, "Let us not hear the voice of the Lord our God nor see this great fire anymore, or we will die."
5:18:17:The Lord said to me, "What they have spoken is good.
5:18:18:I will raise up for them a prophet like you from among their fellow Israelites, and I will put my words in his mouth. He will tell them everything I command him.
5:18:19:If anyone does not listen to my words that the prophet speaks in my name, I myself will call him to account.
5:18:20:But a prophet who presumes to speak in my name anything I have not commanded, or a prophet who speaks in the name of other gods, is to be put to death."
5:18:21:You may say to yourselves, "How can we know when a message has not been spoken by the Lord?"
5:18:22:If what a prophet proclaims in the name of the Lord does not take place or come true, that is a message the Lord has not spoken. The prophet has spoken presumptuously, so do not be alarmed.
5:19:1:When the Lord your God has cut off the nations whose land he is giving you, and you take their place and settle in their cities and houses,
5:19:2:you must set aside three cities for yourselves in the land that the Lord your God is providing you to possess.
5:19:3:Divide the territory of your land into thirds, which the Lord your God is giving you to inherit, and establish a city in each region, so that anyone who kills someone unintentionally may flee there.
5:19:4:This is the rule for anyone who kills another person unintentionally, without previous hostility: they may flee to one of these cities and save their life.
5:19:5:For example, if someone goes into the forest with a neighbor to chop wood and swings an ax to cut down a tree, but the ax head flies off the handle and strikes the neighbor, killing them instantly, the person may flee to one of these cities and live.
5:19:6:Otherwise, the avenger of blood might pursue the killer in a rage, overtake them since the distance is too great, and strike them dead, even though they did not deserve to die because there was no previous hostility between them.
5:19:7:That's why I command you to set aside three cities for this purpose.
5:19:8:If the Lord your God expands your territory, as he swore to your ancestors, and gives you the whole land he promised them,
5:19:9:you must add three more cities to these three, provided you carefully follow all these laws I am giving you today—by loving the Lord your God and always walking in his ways.
5:19:10:In this way, innocent blood will not be shed in the land the Lord your God is giving you as your inheritance, and you will not be guilty of bloodshed.
5:19:11:However, if someone hates their neighbor, lies in wait for them, attacks and kills them, and then flees to one of these cities,
5:19:12:the elders of the killer's hometown must send for the murderer, take them from the city of refuge, and hand them over to the avenger of blood to be put to death.
5:19:13:Do not show pity. You must purge the guilt of innocent blood from Israel, so that it may go well with you.
5:19:14:You must not move your neighbor's boundary stone, which was set up by your ancestors to mark the inheritance you will receive in the land the Lord your God is giving you to possess.
5:19:15:A single witness shall not suffice against a person for any crime or for any wrong in connection with any offense that they have committed. Only on the evidence of two witnesses or three witnesses shall a charge be established.
5:19:16:If a malicious witness comes forward to accuse someone of wrongdoing,
5:19:17:then both parties involved in the dispute must stand in the presence of the Lord, before the priests and judges who are in office at that time.
5:19:18:The judges must investigate thoroughly, and if the witness is found to be lying, having falsely accused the other person,
5:19:19:you must do to the false witness as they intended to do to the accused. In this way, you will purge the evil from among you.
5:19:20:Others will hear of this and be afraid, and never again will such an evil thing be done among you.
5:19:21:Show no pity: life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.
5:20:1:When you go to war against your enemies and see horses, chariots, and an army larger than yours, don't be afraid of them. The LORD your God, who brought you out of Egypt, is with you.
5:20:2:Before the battle begins, a priest should come forward and address the troops.
5:20:3:He will say to them, "Listen, Israel! Today you're about to face a battle against your enemies. Don't lose heart or be afraid; don't panic or tremble because of them.
5:20:4:For the LORD your God goes with you, fighting for you against your enemies to give you victory."
5:20:5:Then the officials will speak to the soldiers, saying, "Is there anyone who has built a new house but hasn't dedicated it yet? Let him return home; otherwise, he may die in battle and someone else will dedicate it.
5:20:6:Has anyone planted a vineyard but not yet enjoyed its fruit? Let him go back home; otherwise, he might die in battle and another person will enjoy its fruit.
5:20:7:If anyone is engaged to be married and hasn't married yet, let him return home; otherwise, he may die in battle and someone else will marry his fiancée."
5:20:8:The officials will also ask, "Is there anyone here who's afraid or weak-hearted? If so, let him go back home, so that his fear doesn't spread to others."
5:20:9:When the officials have finished speaking to the troops, they will appoint commanders to lead them.
5:20:10:When you approach a city to fight against it, first offer it terms of peace.
5:20:11:If the city accepts your terms and opens its gates to you, all the people in it will become your subjects and serve you.
5:20:12:But if the city refuses to make peace with you and chooses to fight, then you must lay siege to it.
5:20:13:When the LORD your God delivers the city into your hands, kill every male in it with your sword.
5:20:14:However, take the women, children, livestock, and everything else in the city as plunder. You may use this plunder from your enemies that the LORD your God has given you.
5:20:15:That's how you should treat cities far away from you, which don't belong to the nearby nations.
5:20:16:But when it comes to the cities of the nations that the LORD your God is giving you as an inheritance, don't let any living thing survive.
5:20:17:Instead, completely destroy them—the Hittites, Amorites, Canaanites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites—as the LORD your God has commanded you.
5:20:18:Do this so they won't teach you to follow their detestable practices, which they've done for their gods, causing you to sin against the LORD your God.
5:20:19:While laying siege to a city for an extended period, don't destroy its trees by cutting them down with an ax. You can eat their fruit, but don't cut them down. Are the trees in the field human beings that you should besiege them?
5:20:20:However, you may cut down trees not producing food and use them to build siege works until the city falls.
5:21:1:If a dead body is found lying in the open countryside, and it's unclear who killed the person,
5:21:2:the elders and judges from nearby towns must determine which town is closest to the corpse.
5:21:3:Then, the elders of that town should take a young cow that has never been put to work or worn a yoke,
5:21:4:and bring the cow to an uncultivated valley with flowing water, where the land has not been plowed or sown. There, they shall break the cow's neck.
5:21:5:The priests, the sons of Levi, will come forward, for the Lord your God has chosen them to serve Him and to bless in His name, and they are responsible for settling disputes and cases of assault.
5:21:6:All the elders of the town nearest to the corpse will wash their hands over the cow whose neck was broken in the valley,
5:21:7:and declare, "Our hands did not shed this blood, nor did our eyes see it happen.
5:21:8:Lord, forgive your people Israel, whom you have redeemed, and do not hold the innocent bloodshed against us." Then, the guilt of shedding innocent blood will be forgiven.
5:21:9:By doing this, you will remove the guilt of innocent blood from among you, for you must do what is right in the sight of the Lord.
5:21:10:When you go to war against your enemies and the Lord your God delivers them into your hands, and you take captives,
5:21:11:if you notice among the captives a beautiful woman and are attracted to her, you may take her as your wife.
5:21:12:Bring her into your home, and she must shave her head, trim her nails,
5:21:13:and remove the clothes she was wearing when captured. She will live in your house and mourn for her father and mother for a full month. After that, you may go to her and be her husband, and she will be your wife.
5:21:14:But if you are not pleased with her, let her go wherever she wishes. You must not sell her or treat her as a slave since you have dishonored her.
5:21:15:If a man has two wives, one loved and the other unloved, and both bear him sons, but the firstborn is the son of the unloved wife,
5:21:16:when he divides his inheritance among his children, he must not give the rights of the firstborn to the son of the loved wife in preference to the son of the unloved wife, who is actually the firstborn.
5:21:17:He must acknowledge the firstborn, the son of the unloved wife, by giving him a double portion of all that he has. That son is the first sign of his father's strength, and the right of the firstborn belongs to him.
5:21:18:If a man has a stubborn and rebellious son who does not obey his father and mother and doesn't listen to them even after they discipline him,
5:21:19:his father and mother shall take hold of him and bring him to the elders at the gate of his town.
5:21:20:They will say to the elders, "This son of ours is stubborn and rebellious; he refuses to obey us. He is a glutton and a drunkard."
5:21:21:Then all the men of his town shall stone him to death. You must purge the evil from among you, and all Israel will hear of it and be afraid.
5:21:22:If someone is guilty of a crime deserving death and is executed, and you hang their body on a tree,
5:21:23:you must not leave the body hanging on the tree overnight. Be sure to bury it that same day, because anyone who is hung on a tree is under God's curse. You must not defile the land the Lord your God is giving you as an inheritance.
5:22:1:If you come across your neighbor's stray ox or sheep, don't ignore it. Instead, return it to its owner.
5:22:2:But if the owner lives far away or you don't know who they are, take the animal home and care for it until the owner comes looking for it. Then give it back.
5:22:3:Do the same if you find a lost donkey, garment, or anything else your neighbor has lost. Don't just walk away.
5:22:4:When you see your neighbor's donkey or ox fallen on the road, don't ignore it. Help them lift it up.
5:22:5:A man shouldn't wear women's clothing, and a woman shouldn't wear men's clothing. The Lord detests anyone who does this.
5:22:6:If you happen upon a bird's nest with chicks or eggs, and the mother bird is sitting on them, don't take the mother with the young.
5:22:7:You may take the young, but let the mother go, so that things will go well for you and you'll have a long life.
5:22:8:When you build a new house, make sure to put a railing around the roof to prevent accidents. You don't want anyone falling off and causing bloodshed in your house.
5:22:9:Don't plant two types of seeds in your vineyard; otherwise, both the crops and the fruit of the vineyard will be defiled.
5:22:10:Don't plow with an ox and a donkey together.
5:22:11:Avoid wearing clothes made of both wool and linen mixed together.
5:22:12:Put tassels on the four corners of the cloak you wear.
5:22:13:If a man marries a woman and then dislikes her, accusing her of misconduct and giving her a bad name,
5:22:14:saying, "I married this woman, but when I slept with her, I didn't find any proof of her virginity,"
5:22:15:the woman's father and mother must bring the evidence of her virginity to the city elders at the city gate.
5:22:16:The father will say to the elders, "I gave my daughter to this man as his wife, but he now dislikes her
5:22:17:and accuses her of misconduct, saying, 'I didn't find any proof of your daughter's virginity.' But here's the evidence of my daughter's virginity." Then they'll spread out the cloth before the city elders.
5:22:18:The elders will take the man and punish him.
5:22:19:They'll fine him a hundred shekels of silver and give it to the woman's father because the man has given a bad name to an Israelite virgin. She'll remain his wife, and he can never divorce her.
5:22:20:But if the accusation is true and there's no proof of the young woman's virginity,
5:22:21:she should be brought to the door of her father's house, and the men of her city will stone her to death. She has committed an outrageous act in Israel by being promiscuous while still living in her father's house. You must purge the evil from among you.
5:22:22:If a man is caught sleeping with another man's wife, both the man who slept with her and the woman must die. You must purge the evil from Israel.
5:22:23:If a man meets a virgin who is engaged to be married and sleeps with her in the city,
5:22:24:you must take both of them to the city gate and stone them to death—the young woman because she didn't cry for help in the city, and the man because he violated another man's wife. You must purge the evil from among you.
5:22:25:But if the man meets the engaged woman in the countryside and forces her to sleep with him, only the man should die.
5:22:26:Do nothing to the young woman; she has committed no sin deserving death. This case is like one where a man attacks his neighbor and kills him.
5:22:27:The man found the engaged woman in the countryside, and though she cried for help, there was no one to rescue her.
5:22:28:If a man meets a virgin who is not engaged and sleeps with her, grabbing hold of her and lying with her, and they are discovered,
5:22:29:the man who slept with her must pay the woman's father fifty shekels of silver. He must also marry her because he violated her. He can never divorce her as long as he lives
5:23:1: People who have been emasculated by having their testicles crushed or their male organ cut off are not allowed to join the assembly of the Lord.
5:23:2: No one born of an illegitimate relationship may enter the assembly of the Lord, nor can any descendants up to the tenth generation.
5:23:3: Ammonites and Moabites are not permitted to join the assembly of the Lord, even after the tenth generation.
5:23:4: This is because they didn't help you with food and water when you were on your way out of Egypt, and because they hired Balaam son of Beor from Pethor in Aram Naharaim to curse you.
5:23:5: But the Lord your God wouldn't listen to Balaam, turning the curse into a blessing for you, because the Lord your God loves you.
5:23:6: Never seek peace or friendship with them throughout your lives.
5:23:7: Don't despise Edomites, as they are your relatives, nor Egyptians, since you were once foreigners in their land.
5:23:8: The third generation of children born to them may enter the assembly of the Lord.
5:23:9: When you're at war against your enemies, stay away from anything impure.
5:23:10: If someone becomes unclean because of a nocturnal emission, they must leave the camp and stay outside.
5:23:11: As evening approaches, they should wash themselves with water, and at sunset, they may re-enter the camp.
5:23:12: Designate a place outside the camp where you can relieve yourself.
5:23:13: Carry a digging tool as part of your equipment so that you can dig a hole and cover up your excrement.
5:23:14: The Lord your God moves about in your camp to protect you and deliver your enemies to you. Keep your camp holy, so that he doesn't see anything indecent among you and turn away.
5:23:15: Don't return a slave who has escaped from their master and sought refuge with you.
5:23:16: Let them live among you, wherever they choose, in any town they like. Don't oppress them.
5:23:17: No Israelite man or woman should become a shrine prostitute.
5:23:18: Don't bring the earnings of a prostitute or the wages of a male prostitute into the house of the Lord your God to fulfill any vow, for both are detestable to the Lord your God.
5:23:19: Don't charge your fellow Israelites interest on loans, whether it's money, food, or anything else that can earn interest.
5:23:20: You may charge interest to foreigners, but not to your fellow Israelites, so that the Lord your God may bless you in everything you do in the land you're entering to possess.
5:23:21: When you make a vow to the Lord your God, don't delay in fulfilling it, for the Lord your God will surely require it of you, and you will be guilty of sin.
5:23:22: If you refrain from making a vow, you won't be guilty of sin.
5:23:23: Be careful to do what you've promised, since you made your vow voluntarily to the Lord your God.
5:23:24: When you enter your neighbor's vineyard, you may eat as many grapes as you want until you're satisfied, but don't put any in your container.
5:23:25: When you enter your neighbor's field of standing grain, you may pluck the heads with your hand, but don't use a sickle on your neighbor's standing grain.
5:24:1:If a man marries a woman and later finds something indecent about her, he may write her a certificate of divorce, hand it to her, and send her away from his house.
5:24:2:After leaving his home, she may become another man's wife.
5:24:3:But if her second husband dislikes her, writes her a certificate of divorce, hands it to her, and sends her away, or if the second husband dies,
5:24:4:the first husband cannot remarry her after she has been defiled, for that is detestable in the eyes of the Lord. You must not bring sin upon the land that the Lord your God is giving you as an inheritance.
5:24:5:A newlywed man should not be sent to war or given any other public duty. He is to be free at home for one year to bring happiness to his new wife.
5:24:6:Do not take a pair of millstones, or even just the upper one, as security for a debt, because that would be taking someone's livelihood as collateral.
5:24:7:If someone is caught kidnapping a fellow Israelite, enslaving them, or selling them, the kidnapper must be put to death. You must purge the evil from among you.
5:24:8:In cases of infectious skin diseases, follow carefully the instructions of the priests who are Levites. Obey all the commands I have given them.
5:24:9:Remember what the Lord your God did to Miriam on your journey out of Egypt.
5:24:10:When you lend something to your neighbor, do not enter their house to take what they offer as a pledge.
5:24:11:Wait outside, and let the borrower bring the pledge to you.
5:24:12:If the borrower is poor, do not sleep with their pledge.
5:24:13:Return the cloak to its owner by sunset so they can sleep in it and bless you. This will be credited to you as righteousness before the Lord your God.
5:24:14:Do not take advantage of a hired worker who is poor and needy, whether they are a fellow Israelite or a foreigner living in one of your towns.
5:24:15:Pay them their wages each day before sunset because they are poor and rely on them. Otherwise, they might cry out to the Lord against you, and you would be guilty of sin.
5:24:16:Fathers shall not be put to death for their children, nor children for their fathers; each person should be put to death for their own sin.
5:24:17:Do not deprive the foreigner or the fatherless of justice, nor take a widow's cloak as a pledge.
5:24:18:Remember that you were slaves in Egypt, and the Lord your God redeemed you from there. That's why I command you to do this.
5:24:19:When you harvest your crops in your field and forget a sheaf, do not go back to get it. Leave it for the foreigner, the fatherless, and the widow, so that the Lord your God may bless you in all the work of your hands.
5:24:20:When you beat the olives from your trees, do not go over the branches a second time. Leave what remains for the foreigner, the fatherless, and the widow.
5:24:21:When you harvest grapes in your vineyard, do not glean the vines afterward. Leave the remaining grapes for the foreigner, the fatherless, and the widow.
5:24:22:Remember that you were slaves in Egypt. That's why I command you to do this.
5:25:1:If there's a dispute between people and they go to court, the judges will decide the case, acquitting the innocent party and condemning the guilty one.
5:25:2:When the guilty person is sentenced to be whipped, the judge shall make them lie down and receive the punishment in their presence.
5:25:3:They can be given up to forty lashes, but no more; otherwise, your fellow Israelite would be degraded in your eyes.
5:25:4:Don't muzzle an ox when it's treading out grain.
5:25:5:If brothers live together and one of them dies without having a son, the dead man's wife shouldn't marry a stranger outside the family. Instead, her brother-in-law should marry her, taking her as his wife in a levirate marriage.
5:25:6:The first son she bears will carry on the name of the deceased brother so that his name won't be forgotten in Israel.
5:25:7:But if the man doesn't want to marry his sister-in-law, she can go to the elders at the town gate and say, "My brother-in-law refuses to preserve his brother's name in Israel; he won't perform the duty of a brother-in-law for me."
5:25:8:Then the elders of the town will summon him and talk to him. If he insists on not marrying her, saying, "I don't want to marry her,"
5:25:9:his sister-in-law will approach him in the presence of the elders, pull off one of his sandals, spit in his face, and declare, "This is what happens to the man who refuses to build up his brother's family line."
5:25:10:From then on, his family will be known in Israel as "the house of the unsandaled one."
5:25:11:If two men are fighting and the wife of one of them comes to rescue her husband from his assailant, reaching out and seizing him by his genitals,
5:25:12:you must cut off her hand. Show her no pity.
5:25:13:Don't have two different weights in your bag—one heavy, one light.
5:25:14:Also, don't have two different measures in your house—one large, one small.
5:25:15:You must have accurate and honest weights and measures so that you may live long in the land the Lord your God is giving you.
5:25:16:For the Lord detests anyone who cheats with dishonest weights or measures.
5:25:17:Remember what the Amalekites did to you on your way out of Egypt.
5:25:18:They attacked you when you were weary and worn out, cutting off those who were lagging behind; they had no fear of God.
5:25:19:So when the Lord your God grants you rest from all your enemies around you in the land he's giving you as an inheritance, be sure to blot out the memory of Amalek from under heaven. Don't forget!
5:26:1:When you enter the land that the Lord your God is giving you as an inheritance, and you possess it and settle there,
5:26:2:take some of the first fruits of all that you harvest from the soil of the land the Lord your God is giving you. Put them in a basket and go to the place where the Lord your God will choose to establish his name.
5:26:3:Approach the priest who is serving at that time and say to him, "Today I declare to the Lord your God that I have come into the land the Lord swore to our ancestors to give us."
5:26:4:The priest will take the basket from your hands and set it down in front of the altar of the Lord your God.
5:26:5:Then you shall recite before the Lord your God: "My father was a wandering Aramean, and he went down to Egypt with a few people and lived there, becoming a great, powerful, and populous nation.
5:26:6:The Egyptians mistreated us, made us suffer, and imposed harsh slavery on us.
5:26:7:But we cried out to the Lord, the God of our ancestors, and the Lord heard our voice, saw our misery, toil, and oppression.
5:26:8:So the Lord brought us out of Egypt with a strong hand and an outstretched arm, with great terror, signs, and wonders.
5:26:9:He has brought us to this place and given us this land, a land flowing with milk and honey.
5:26:10:Now I bring the first fruits of the soil that you, Lord, have given me." Place the basket before the Lord your God and bow down before him.
5:26:11:Celebrate with the Levites and the foreigners living among you all the good things the Lord your God has given to you and your household.
5:26:12:When you have finished setting aside a tenth of all your produce in the third year, the year of the tithe, give it to the Levites, the foreigners, the orphans, and the widows, so that they may eat in your towns and be satisfied.
5:26:13:Then say to the Lord your God, "I have removed the sacred portion from my house, and I have given it to the Levites, the foreigners, the orphans, and the widows, according to all your commandments that you have commanded me. I have not transgressed any of your commands, nor have I forgotten them.
5:26:14:I have not eaten any of the sacred portion while in mourning, nor have I removed any of it while unclean, nor offered any of it to the dead. I have obeyed the Lord my God; I have done everything you commanded me.
5:26:15:Look down from your holy dwelling place, from heaven, and bless your people Israel and the land you have given us, as you swore to our ancestors—a land flowing with milk and honey."
5:26:16:Today the Lord your God commands you to follow these statutes and ordinances. Be careful to obey them with all your heart and with all your soul.
5:26:17:You have declared today that the Lord is your God, and that you will walk in his ways, keep his statutes, commandments, and ordinances, and obey him.
5:26:18:And the Lord has declared this day that you are his people, his treasured possession as he promised, and that you are to keep all his commandments.
5:26:19:He will set you high above all nations he has made, in praise, fame, and honor; and you will be a people holy to the Lord your God, as he has spoken.
5:27:1:At that time, Moses and the elders of Israel instructed the people, saying, "Keep all the commandments I'm giving you today.
5:27:2:When you cross the Jordan River into the land the Lord your God is providing for you, set up large stones and coat them with plaster.
5:27:3:Write on these stones all the words of this law once you have entered the land. This way, you will take possession of the land the Lord your God is giving you—a land flowing with milk and honey, as the Lord, the God of your ancestors, has promised.
5:27:4:After crossing the Jordan, erect these stones on Mount Ebal, as I am commanding you today, and cover them with plaster.
5:27:5:Build an altar there to the Lord your God—an altar made of stones. Do not use any iron tool on them.
5:27:6:Use uncut stones to build the altar of the Lord your God, and offer burnt offerings on it to the Lord your God.
5:27:7:Sacrifice fellowship offerings there, and celebrate in the presence of the Lord your God.
5:27:8:On the stones, write clearly every word of this law."
5:27:9:Moses and the Levitical priests then addressed all Israel, saying, "Pay attention, Israel! Today you have become the people of the Lord your God.
5:27:10:Obey the Lord your God by following his commands and decrees, which I am giving you today."
5:27:11:Moses also gave these instructions to the people that day:
5:27:12:"When you cross the Jordan, these tribes will stand on Mount Gerizim to bless the people: Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, Joseph, and Benjamin.
5:27:13:And these tribes will stand on Mount Ebal to pronounce curses: Reuben, Gad, Asher, Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali.
5:27:14:The Levites will then recite these curses to all the people of Israel in a loud voice:
5:27:15:'Cursed is anyone who makes an idol—a thing detestable to the Lord, the work of skilled hands—and secretly sets it up.' Then all the people will say, 'Amen!'
5:27:16:'Cursed is anyone who dishonors their father or mother.' Then all the people will say, 'Amen!'
5:27:17:'Cursed is anyone who moves their neighbor's boundary stone.' Then all the people will say, 'Amen!'
5:27:18:'Cursed is anyone who leads the blind astray on the road.' Then all the people will say, 'Amen!'
5:27:19:'Cursed is anyone who withholds justice from the foreigner, the fatherless, or the widow.' Then all the people will say, 'Amen!'
5:27:20:'Cursed is anyone who sleeps with his father's wife, for he has violated his father's marriage bed.' Then all the people will say, 'Amen!'
5:27:21:'Cursed is anyone who has sexual relations with any animal.' Then all the people will say, 'Amen!'
5:27:22:'Cursed is anyone who sleeps with his sister, whether she is the daughter of his father or of his mother.' Then all the people will say, 'Amen!'
5:27:23:'Cursed is anyone who sleeps with his mother-in-law.' Then all the people will say, 'Amen!'
5:27:24:'Cursed is anyone who kills their neighbor in secret.' Then all the people will say, 'Amen!'
5:27:25:'Cursed is anyone who accepts a bribe to kill an innocent person.' Then all the people will say, 'Amen!'
5:27:26:'Cursed is anyone who does not uphold and obey the words of this law.' Then all the people will say, 'Amen!'"
5:28:1:If you listen closely to the voice of the Lord your God and carefully obey all his commandments that I am giving you today, he will set you high above all the nations on earth.
5:28:2:All these blessings will come upon you and accompany you if you obey the Lord your God:
5:28:3:You'll be blessed in the city and blessed in the countryside.
5:28:4:The fruit of your womb, the crops of your land, and the offspring of your livestock – both the young of your cattle and the flocks of your sheep – will be blessed.
5:28:5:Your basket and your kneading trough will be blessed.
5:28:6:You'll be blessed when you come in and blessed when you go out.
5:28:7:The Lord will cause your enemies who rise against you to be defeated before you. They will come at you from one direction but flee from you in seven.
5:28:8:The Lord will send a blessing on your barns and on everything you put your hand to. The Lord your God will bless you in the land he is giving you.
5:28:9:The Lord will establish you as his holy people, as he promised you on oath, if you keep the commands of the Lord your God and walk in obedience to him.
5:28:10:Then all the peoples on earth will see that you are called by the name of the Lord, and they will fear you.
5:28:11:The Lord will grant you abundant prosperity – in the fruit of your womb, the young of your livestock, and the crops of your ground – in the land he swore to your ancestors to give you.
5:28:12:The Lord will open the heavens, the storehouse of his bounty, to send rain on your land in season and to bless all the work of your hands. You will lend to many nations but will borrow from none.
5:28:13:The Lord will make you the head, not the tail. If you pay attention to the commands of the Lord your God that I give you this day and carefully follow them, you will always be at the top, never at the bottom.
5:28:14:Do not turn aside from any of the commands I give you today, to the right or to the left, following other gods and serving them.
5:28:15:But if you do not obey the Lord your God and do not carefully follow all his commands and decrees I am giving you today, all these curses will come on you and overtake you:
5:28:16:You will be cursed in the city and cursed in the country.
5:28:17:Your basket and your kneading trough will be cursed.
5:28:18:The fruit of your womb and the crops of your land, the calves of your herds and the lambs of your flocks, will be cursed.
5:28:19:You'll be cursed when you come in and cursed when you go out.
5:28:20:The Lord will send on you curses, confusion, and rebuke in everything you put your hand to until you are destroyed and come to sudden ruin because of the evil you have done in forsaking him.
5:28:21:The Lord will plague you with diseases until he has destroyed you from the land you are entering to possess.
5:28:22:The Lord will strike you with wasting disease, with fever and inflammation, with scorching heat and drought, with blight and mildew, which will plague you until you perish.
5:28:23:The sky over your head will be bronze, and the ground beneath you iron.
5:28:24:The Lord will turn the rain of your country into dust and powder; it will come down from the skies until you are destroyed.
5:28:25:The Lord will cause you to be defeated before your enemies. You will come at them from one direction but flee from them in seven, and you will become a thing of horror to all the kingdoms on earth.
5:28:26:Your carcasses will be food for all the birds and the wild animals, and there will be no one to frighten them away.
5:28:27:The Lord will afflict you with the boils of Egypt and with tumors, festering sores, and the itch, from which you cannot be cured.
5:28:28:The Lord will strike you with madness, blindness, and confusion of mind.
5:28:29:At midday you will grope about like a blind person in the dark. You will be unsuccessful in everything you do; day after day you will be oppressed and robbed, with no one to rescue you.
5:28:30:You will be pledged to be married to a woman, but another will take her and rape her. You will build a house, but you won't live in it. You will plant a vineyard, but you will not even begin to enjoy its fruit.
5:28:31:Your ox will be slaughtered before your eyes, but you will eat none of it. Your donkey will be forcibly taken from you and will not be returned. Your sheep will be given to your enemies, and no one will rescue them.
5:28:32:Your sons and daughters will be given to another nation, and you will wear out your eyes watching for them day after day, powerless to lift a hand.
5:28:33:A people that you do not know will eat what your land and labor produce, and you will have nothing but cruel oppression all your days.
5:28:34:The sights you see will drive you mad.
5:28:35:The Lord will afflict your knees and legs with painful boils that cannot be cured, spreading from the soles of your feet to the top of your head.
5:28:36:The Lord will drive you and the king you set over you to a nation unknown to you or your ancestors. There you will worship other gods, gods of wood and stone.
5:28:37:You will become a thing of horror, a byword, and an object of ridicule among all the peoples where the Lord will drive you.
5:28:38:You will sow much seed in the field but you will harvest little because locusts will devour it.
5:28:39:You will plant vineyards and cultivate them but you will not drink the wine or gather the grapes because worms will eat them.
5:28:40:You will have olive trees throughout your country but you will not use the oil because the olives will drop off.
5:28:41:You will have sons and daughters but you will not keep them because they will go into captivity.
5:28:42:Swarms of locusts will take over all your trees and the crops of your land.
5:28:43:The foreigners who reside among you will rise above you higher and higher, but you will sink lower and lower.
5:28:44:They will lend to you, but you will not lend to them. They will be the head, but you will be the tail.
5:28:45:All these curses will come on you. They will pursue you and overtake you until you are destroyed because you did not obey the Lord your God and observe the commands and decrees he gave you.
5:28:46:These curses will be a sign and a wonder to you and your descendants forever.
5:28:47:Because you did not serve the Lord your God joyfully and gladly in the time of prosperity,
5:28:48:therefore in hunger and thirst, in nakedness and dire poverty, you will serve the enemies the Lord sends against you. He will put an iron yoke on your neck until he has destroyed you.
5:28:49:The Lord will bring a nation against you from far away, from the ends of the earth, like an eagle swooping down, a nation whose language you will not understand,
5:28:50:a fierce-looking nation without respect for the old or pity for the young.
5:28:51:They will devour the young of your livestock and the crops of your land until you are destroyed. They will leave you no grain, new wine, or olive oil, nor any calves of your herds or lambs of your flocks until you are ruined.
5:28:52:They will lay siege to all the cities throughout your land until the high fortified walls in which you trust fall down. They will besiege all the cities throughout the land the Lord your God is giving you.
5:28:53:Because of the suffering your enemy will inflict on you during the siege, you will eat the fruit of the womb, the flesh of the sons and daughters the Lord your God has given you.
5:28:54:Even the most gentle and sensitive man among you will have no compassion on his own brother or the wife he loves or his surviving children,
5:28:55:and he will not give to one of them any of the flesh of his children that he is eating. It will be all he has left because of the suffering your enemy will inflict on you during the siege of all your cities.
5:28:56:The most gentle and sensitive woman among you – so sensitive and gentle that she would not venture to touch the ground with the sole of her foot – will begrudge the husband she loves and her own son or daughter
5:28:57:the afterbirth from her womb and the children she bears. For in her dire need she intends to eat them secretly because of the suffering your enemy will inflict on you during the siege of your cities.
5:28:58:If you do not carefully follow all the words of this law, which are written in this book, and do not revere this glorious and awesome name – the Lord your God –
5:28:59:the Lord will send fearful plagues on you and your descendants, harsh and prolonged disasters, and severe and lingering illnesses.
5:28:60:He will bring on you all the diseases of Egypt that you dreaded, and they will cling to you.
5:28:61:The Lord will also bring on you every kind of sickness and disaster not recorded in this Book of the Law, until you are destroyed.
5:28:62:You who were as numerous as the stars in the sky will be left but few in number because you did not obey the Lord your God.
5:28:63:Just as it pleased the Lord to make you prosper and increase in number, so it will please him to ruin and destroy you. You will be uprooted from the land you are entering to possess.
5:28:64:Then the Lord will scatter you among all nations, from one end of the earth to the other. There you will worship other gods – gods of wood and stone, which neither you nor your ancestors have known.
5:28:65:Among those nations you will find no repose, no resting place for the sole of your foot. There the Lord will give you an anxious mind, eyes weary with longing, and a despairing heart.
5:28:66:You will live in constant suspense, filled with dread both night and day, never sure of your life.
5:28:67:In the morning you will say, "If only it were evening!" and in the evening, "If only it were morning!" – because of the terror that will fill your hearts and the sights that your eyes will see.
5:28:68:The Lord will send you back in ships to Egypt on a journey I said you should never make again. There you will offer yourselves for sale to your enemies as male and female slaves, but no one will buy you.
5:29:1:On that day, Moses gathered the Israelites together and told them, "You have seen everything the Lord has done in front of you in Egypt, to Pharaoh, his officials, and his entire land.
5:29:2:You witnessed those great trials, signs, and wonders with your own eyes.
5:29:3:But until now, the Lord hasn't given you a mind that understands, eyes that see, or ears that hear.
5:29:4:I led you through the wilderness for forty years. Your clothes didn't wear out, and your sandals didn't fall apart.
5:29:5:You didn't eat bread or drink wine or strong drink, so you would know that I am the Lord your God.
5:29:6:When we came to this place, King Sihon of Heshbon and King Og of Bashan came out to fight against us, but we defeated them.
5:29:7:We took their land and gave it as an inheritance to the tribes of Reuben, Gad, and half the tribe of Manasseh.
5:29:8:So keep the words of this covenant and follow them, so that you may prosper in everything you do.
5:29:9:Today, all of you are standing before the Lord your God—your leaders, your tribes, your elders, your officers, and all the men of Israel,
5:29:10:together with your children, your wives, and the foreigners living among you who cut your wood and draw your water—
5:29:11:to enter into a covenant with the Lord your God and to accept the oath he is making with you today.
5:29:12:He is making this covenant and this oath not only with you who are standing here today in the presence of the Lord our God,
5:29:13:but also with those who are not here today.
5:29:14:You know how we lived in Egypt and how we traveled through the nations as we left.
5:29:15:You saw their detestable things and idols made of wood, stone, silver, and gold.
5:29:16:Make sure there is no one among you—man, woman, family, or tribe—whose heart turns away from the Lord our God to worship these gods of other nations. This would be like a root that grows bitter and poisonous fruit.
5:29:17:When such a person hears the words of this oath, they may think they can continue in their stubborn ways and still have peace and prosperity. But that will lead to the destruction of the well-watered land as well as the dry land.
5:29:18:The Lord will not forgive such a person. Instead, his anger and jealousy will burn against them. Every curse written in this book will fall on them, and the Lord will erase their names from under heaven.
5:29:19:The Lord will single them out for disaster from all the tribes of Israel, according to all the curses of the covenant written in this Book of the Law.
5:29:20:Then the future generations, your descendants who come after you, and the foreigners who come from distant lands will see the disasters that have fallen on the land and the diseases the Lord has inflicted on it.
5:29:21:They will ask, 'Why has the Lord done this to this land? What caused such fierce anger?'
5:29:22:And the answer will be, 'It's because they abandoned the covenant of the Lord, the God of their ancestors, which he made with them when he brought them out of Egypt.
5:29:23:They went and served other gods, bowing down to gods they didn't know—gods he had not given them.
5:29:24:That is why the Lord's anger burned against this land, bringing on it all the curses written in this book.
5:29:25:The Lord uprooted them from their land in anger, fury, and great wrath, and he cast them into another land, as it is today.'
5:29:26:The secret things belong to the Lord our God, but the revealed things belong to us and our children forever, so that we may follow all the words of this law.
5:30:1:When all these things happen to you—the blessings and the curses I've presented to you—and you take them to heart, no matter where the Lord your God has scattered you among the nations,
5:30:2:and when you return to the Lord your God and obey his voice according to everything I command you today, with all your heart and soul, both you and your children,
5:30:3:then the Lord your God will restore your fortunes, have compassion on you, and gather you again from all the peoples where he has scattered you.
5:30:4:Even if you are at the ends of the earth, he will bring you back and gather you from there.
5:30:5:The Lord your God will bring you to the land your ancestors possessed, and you will possess it. He will make you more prosperous and numerous than your ancestors.
5:30:6:Moreover, the Lord your God will circumcise your heart and the hearts of your descendants, so that you will love him with all your heart and soul, and live.
5:30:7:The Lord your God will put all these curses on your enemies and those who hate and persecute you.
5:30:8:You will again obey the Lord and follow all his commands that I give you today.
5:30:9:The Lord your God will make you abundantly prosperous in all the work of your hands, in the fruit of your womb, the offspring of your livestock, and the produce of your land. For the Lord will again delight in your well-being, as he did with your ancestors,
5:30:10:when you obey the Lord your God by keeping his commands and statutes written in this Book of the Law, and when you turn to him with all your heart and soul.
5:30:11:This command I'm giving you today isn't too difficult for you, nor is it far away.
5:30:12:It's not in heaven, so you don't have to ask, "Who will go up to heaven and bring it down for us, so we can hear and obey it?"
5:30:13:Nor is it across the sea, so you don't have to ask, "Who will cross the sea and bring it to us, so we can hear and obey it?"
5:30:14:No, the word is very near you; it's in your mouth and in your heart, so you can follow it.
5:30:15:Look, I've set before you today life and prosperity, death and destruction.
5:30:16:For I command you today to love the Lord your God, to walk in his ways, and to keep his commands, statutes, and ordinances, so that you may live and multiply, and the Lord your God will bless you in the land you're about to enter and possess.
5:30:17:But if your heart turns away and you don't listen, and you're led astray to worship other gods and serve them,
5:30:18:I declare to you today that you will certainly perish; you won't live long in the land you're crossing the Jordan to enter and possess.
5:30:19:I call heaven and earth as witnesses against you today that I've set before you life and death, blessing and curse. So choose life, so that you and your descendants may live,
5:30:20:by loving the Lord your God, obeying his voice, and holding fast to him. For he is your life, and he will prolong your days, enabling you to live in the land the Lord swore to give to your ancestors, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
5:31:1:When Moses was finished speaking with the Israelites, he said to them, "I am now 120 years old and can no longer lead you. The Lord has told me that I will not cross the Jordan River.
5:31:2:The Lord your God will go ahead of you, and He will destroy the nations living there so you can occupy their land. Joshua will be your leader, as the Lord has promised.
5:31:3:The Lord will do to those nations what He did to Sihon and Og, the kings of the Amorites, when He destroyed them along with their land.
5:31:4:The Lord will hand over your enemies to you, and you must do to them exactly as I have instructed you.
5:31:5:Be strong and courageous! Don't be afraid or terrified of them, for the Lord your God is with you; He will never leave you nor forsake you."
5:31:6:Moses then called for Joshua and said to him in front of all the people, "Be strong and courageous, for you will lead these people into the land that the Lord swore to their ancestors to give them. You will be the one to help them take possession of it.
5:31:7:The Lord Himself goes before you and will be with you; He will never leave you nor forsake you. Do not be afraid; do not be discouraged."
5:31:8:After this, Moses wrote down the Law and gave it to the priests, who were Levites and carried the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, and to all the elders of Israel.
5:31:9:Moses instructed them, saying, "At the end of every seven years, during the Festival of Tabernacles, when all Israel comes to appear before the Lord your God at the place He will choose,
5:31:10:you must read this Law before all the people, so they can listen and learn to fear the Lord your God and carefully follow all the words of this Law.
5:31:11:Their children, who do not know this Law, must hear it and learn to fear the Lord your God as long as you live in the land you are crossing the Jordan to possess."
5:31:12:The Lord said to Moses, "Your time to die is near. Call Joshua and present yourselves at the Tent of Meeting, where I will commission him." So Moses and Joshua went and presented themselves at the Tent of Meeting.
5:31:13:The Lord appeared at the tent in a pillar of cloud, and the pillar of cloud stood over the entrance to the tent.
5:31:14:The Lord said to Moses, "You will soon rest with your ancestors, and these people will begin to worship other gods, breaking the covenant I made with them.
5:31:15:I will become very angry with them on that day, and I will abandon them. I will hide my face from them, and they will be destroyed. Many disasters and calamities will come upon them, and they will say, 'Have not these disasters come upon us because our God is not with us?'
5:31:16:On that day, I will surely hide my face because of all the evil they have done by turning to other gods.
5:31:17:Now write down this song for yourselves and teach it to the Israelites; have them sing it, so that it may be a witness for me against them.
5:31:18:When I bring them into the land flowing with milk and honey, which I promised to their ancestors, and they eat their fill and grow prosperous, they will turn to other gods and worship them, rejecting me and breaking my covenant.
5:31:19:And when many disasters and calamities come upon them, this song will testify against them, because it will not be forgotten by their descendants. I know what they are disposed to do, even before I bring them into the land I promised them."
5:31:20:Moses wrote down this song that same day and taught it to the Israelites.
5:31:21:The Lord gave this command to Joshua son of Nun: "Be strong and courageous, for you will bring the Israelites into the land I promised them, and I will be with you."
5:31:22:When Moses had finished writing the words of this Law in a book, from beginning to end,
5:31:23:he gave this command to the Levites who carried the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord: "Take this Book of the Law and place it beside the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord your God. There it will remain as a witness against you.
5:31:24:For I know how rebellious and stubborn you are. If you have been rebellious against the Lord while I am still alive and with you, how much more will you rebel after my death!
5:31:25:Gather to me all the elders of your tribes and your officials, so that I can speak these words in their hearing and call the heavens and the earth to testify against them.
5:31:26:For I know that after my death you are sure to become utterly corrupt and turn away from the path I have commanded you. In the days to come, disaster will fall upon you because you will do evil in the sight of the Lord and provoke Him to anger by what your hands have made."
5:31:27:And so Moses recited the words of this song from beginning to end in the hearing of the whole assembly of Israel.
5:32:1:Listen, O heavens, and I will speak; hear, O earth, the words of my mouth.
5:32:2:My teaching will fall like raindrops, and my words will settle like dew, like gentle rain on tender grass, and showers upon the plants.
5:32:3:I will proclaim the name of the Lord; give praise to the greatness of our God!
5:32:4:The Lord is perfect in his work, for all his ways are just. He is a faithful God without injustice, righteous and true is he.
5:32:5:His people have been unfaithful to him; they are not his children, but a corrupt and crooked generation.
5:32:6:Is this how you repay the Lord, you foolish and unwise people? Is he not your Father, who created you, who made you and established you?
5:32:7:Remember the days of old; consider the years long past. Ask your father, and he will tell you; your elders, and they will explain to you.
5:32:8:When the Most High gave nations their inheritance, when he separated humanity, he set boundaries for the peoples according to the number of the heavenly beings.
5:32:9:For the Lord's portion is his people, Jacob his allotted heritage.
5:32:10:He found him in a desert land, in a barren, howling wilderness. He protected and cared for him, guarding him as the apple of his eye.
5:32:11:Like an eagle that stirs up its nest, hovering over its young, spreading its wings to catch them and carrying them on its pinions,
5:32:12:the Lord alone guided him; no foreign god was with him.
5:32:13:He made him ride on the heights of the land and fed him with the produce of the field. He nourished him with honey from the rock and oil from the flinty crag,
5:32:14:with curds from the herd and milk from the flock, with fat of lambs, rams of Bashan, and goats, along with the finest wheat. You drank wine from the blood of grapes.
5:32:15:But Jeshurun grew fat and kicked; filled with food, they became heavy and sleek. They abandoned the God who made them and scorned the Rock of their salvation.
5:32:16:They provoked him to jealousy with foreign gods; they angered him with detestable practices.
5:32:17:They sacrificed to demons, not to God, to gods they had not known, new gods that had come recently, which your ancestors did not fear.
5:32:18:You forgot the Rock who fathered you, and put out of mind the God who gave you birth.
5:32:19:The Lord saw this and rejected them because of the provocation of his sons and daughters.
5:32:20:He said, "I will hide my face from them; I will see what their end will be, for they are a perverse generation, children who are unfaithful.
5:32:21:They have made me jealous with what is not God; they have angered me with their worthless idols. So I will make them jealous with those who are not a people; I will provoke them to anger with a foolish nation.
5:32:22:For a fire has been kindled by my wrath, one that burns to the depths of Sheol. It devours the earth and its harvests and sets ablaze the foundations of the mountains.
5:32:23:I will heap calamities upon them and expend my arrows against them.
5:32:24:They will be wasted by famine, ravaged by plague and deadly disease. I will send against them the fangs of wild beasts, the venom of vipers that glide in the dust.
5:32:25:Outside, the sword will bring death, and inside, terror will strike the young man and young woman, the infant and the gray-haired man.
5:32:26:I would have said, 'I will cut them to pieces; I will wipe out their memory from humanity,'
5:32:27:if I had not feared provocation by the enemy, lest their adversaries misunderstand, lest they say, 'Our hand has triumphed; the Lord has not done all this.'"
5:32:28:For they are a nation without sense, there is no understanding in them.
5:32:29:If only they were wise and discerning, they would understand their future.
5:32:30:How could one chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight, unless their Rock had sold them, unless the Lord had given them up?
5:32:31:For their rock is not like our Rock, even our enemies concede.
5:32:32:Their vine comes from the vine of Sodom and from the fields of Gomorrah. Their grapes are filled with poison, and their clusters with bitterness.
5:32:33:Their wine is the venom of serpents, the deadly poison of cobras.
5:32:34:"Have I not kept this in reserve and sealed it in my vaults?
5:32:35:Vengeance and retribution belong to me; in due time their foot will slip, for the day of their calamity is near, and their doom rushes upon them."
5:32:36:The Lord will vindicate his people and have compassion on his servants when he sees their strength is gone and no one is left, slave or free.
5:32:37:He will say, "Now where are their gods, the rock they took refuge in,
5:32:38:the gods who ate the fat of their sacrifices and drank the wine of their drink offerings? Let them rise up to help you! Let them give you shelter!
5:32:39:See now that I myself am He! There is no god besides me. I put to death and I bring to life, I have wounded and I will heal, and no one can deliver out of my hand.
5:32:40:I lift my hand to heaven and declare: As surely as I live forever,
5:32:41:when I sharpen my flashing sword and my hand grasps it in judgment, I will take vengeance on my adversaries and repay those who hate me.
5:32:42:I will make my arrows drunk with blood, while my sword devours flesh: the blood of the slain and the captives, the heads of the enemy leaders."
5:32:43:Rejoice, you nations, with his people, for he will avenge the blood of his servants; he will take vengeance on his enemies and make atonement for his land and people.
5:32:44:Moses came with Joshua son of Nun and spoke all the words of this song in the hearing of the people.
5:32:45:When Moses finished reciting all these words to all Israel,
5:32:46:he said to them, "Take to heart all the words I have solemnly declared to you this day, so that you may command your children to obey carefully all the words of this law.
5:32:47:They are not just idle words for you—they are your life. By them you will live long in the land you are crossing the Jordan to possess."
5:33:1:This is the blessing that Moses, the man of God, pronounced upon the Israelites before his death.
5:33:2:He said, "The LORD came from Sinai and rose up from Seir; He shone forth from Mount Paran and approached with ten thousand holy ones, with flaming fire at His right hand.
5:33:3:Indeed, He loves His people; all His holy ones are in Your hand. They follow Your steps and receive direction from You.
5:33:4:Moses commanded us the Law, which is an inheritance for the assembly of Jacob.
5:33:5:A king will arise in Jeshurun when the leaders of the people gather together, along with the tribes of Israel.
5:33:6:Let Reuben live and not die out, although his numbers may be few."
5:33:7:Concerning Judah, he said, "Hear, O LORD, the voice of Judah and bring him to his people. Strengthen his hands for battle and be a help against his enemies."
5:33:8:About Levi, he said, "Your Thummim and Urim belong to the godly man you tested at Massah and contended with at the waters of Meribah.
5:33:9:Levi says of his father and mother, 'I have no regard for them.' He does not acknowledge his brothers or know his own children, for he obeys Your word and keeps Your covenant.
5:33:10:They teach Your ordinances to Jacob and Your law to Israel. They present incense before You and whole burnt offerings on Your altar.
5:33:11:Bless, O LORD, his skills and be pleased with the work of his hands. Crush the loins of those who rise against him and of his foes so they cannot rise again."
5:33:12:Of Benjamin, he said, "The beloved of the LORD shall dwell in safety by Him; He shields him all day long, and he rests between His shoulders."
5:33:13:About Joseph, he said, "May the LORD bless his land with the precious dew from heaven above and the deep waters that lie below;
5:33:14:with the best produce of the sun and the choicest yield of the months;
5:33:15:with the finest gifts of the ancient mountains and the bounty of the everlasting hills;
5:33:16:with the best of the earth and its fullness and the favor of Him who dwells in the bush. May these rest on the head of Joseph, on the crown of the prince among his brothers.
5:33:17:The firstborn bull has majesty, and his horns are the horns of a wild ox. With them, he will gore the nations, driving them to the ends of the earth. This is the myriads of Ephraim, and this is the thousands of Manasseh."
5:33:18:Concerning Zebulun, he said, "Rejoice, Zebulun, in your journeys, and Issachar, in your tents.
5:33:19:They will summon peoples to the mountain and there offer sacrifices of righteousness; for they will feast on the abundance of the seas and the hidden treasures of the sand."
5:33:20:Of Gad, he said, "Blessed is he who enlarges Gad's domain! He lies down like a lion and tears off arm and scalp.
5:33:21:He chose the best land for himself, for there a commander's portion was reserved. He came with the leaders of the people and carried out the LORD's righteous will and His judgments for Israel."
5:33:22:Of Dan, he said, "Dan is a lion's cub, leaping forth from Bashan."
5:33:23:About Naphtali, he said, "Naphtali is abounding with favor and full of the LORD's blessing; he will take possession of the west and the south."
5:33:24:Concerning Asher, he said, "Most blessed of sons is Asher; let him be favored by his brothers and let him dip his foot in oil.
5:33:25:Your gates shall be iron and bronze, and your strength will match your days.
5:33:26:"There is no one like the God of Jeshurun, who rides on the heavens to help you and on the clouds in His majesty.
5:33:27:The eternal God is your refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms. He will drive out your enemies before you, saying, 'Destroy them!'
5:33:28:So Israel will live in safety, alone in a land of grain and new wine
5:33:29:where the heavens drop dew.
5:33:30:Happy are you, O Israel! Who is like you, a people saved by the LORD? He is your shield and helper, your glorious sword. Your enemies will cower before you, and you will trample their high places."
5:34:1:Moses climbed up from the plains of Moab to Mount Nebo, to the peak of Pisgah, which is across from Jericho. The Lord showed him the entire Promised Land.
5:34:2:The Lord revealed to him all the territory from Gilead to Dan,
5:34:3:including all of Naphtali, Ephraim, and Manasseh; the whole land of Judah extending to the Mediterranean Sea;
5:34:4:the Negev, the Jordan Valley, and the plain around Jericho, the city of palm trees, as far as Zoar.
5:34:5:Then the Lord said to Moses, "This is the land I promised to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, saying, 'I will give it to your descendants.' I have let you see it with your own eyes, but you will not cross over into it."
5:34:6:So Moses, the servant of the Lord, died there in the land of Moab, as the Lord had said.
5:34:7:He was buried in a valley in the land of Moab, near Beth-peor, but no one knows his exact burial place to this day.
5:34:8:The people of Israel mourned for Moses in the plains of Moab for thirty days, until the time of weeping and mourning was over.
5:34:9:Joshua son of Nun was filled with the spirit of wisdom because Moses had laid his hands on him. So the Israelites listened to him and did what the Lord had commanded Moses.
5:34:10:No prophet has risen in Israel like Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face,
5:34:11:for all the signs and wonders he performed in Egypt against Pharaoh, all his officials, and his entire land,
5:34:12:and for the mighty deeds and terrifying displays of power that Moses performed in the sight of all Israel.