30:1:1:The words of Amos, who was among the shepherds of Tekoa, which he saw concerning Israel in the days of Uzziah king of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam son of Joash king of Israel, two years before the earthquake.
30:1:2:This is what the LORD says: "For three transgressions of Damascus, and for four, I will not revoke the punishment; because they have threshed Gilead with iron sledges.
30:1:3:So I will send fire upon the house of Hazael, and it shall devour the strongholds of Ben-hadad.
30:1:4:I will also break the gate bars of Damascus, and cut off the inhabitants from the Valley of Aven, and the one who holds the scepter from Beth-eden; and the people of Syria shall go into exile to Kir," says the LORD.
30:1:5:Thus says the LORD: "For three transgressions of Gaza, and for four, I will not revoke the punishment; because they carried away captive a whole community to deliver them up to Edom.
30:1:6:Therefore, I will send fire upon the wall of Gaza, and it shall devour its strongholds.
30:1:7:I will also cut off the inhabitants from Ashdod, and the one who holds the scepter from Ashkelon; I will turn my hand against Ekron, and the remnant of the Philistines shall perish," says the Lord GOD.
30:1:8:And the LORD proclaims: "For three transgressions of Tyre, and for four, I will not revoke the punishment; because they delivered up an entire community to Edom, and did not remember the covenant of brotherhood.
30:1:9:So I will send fire upon the wall of Tyre, and it shall devour its strongholds."
30:1:10:The LORD declares: "For three transgressions of Edom, and for four, I will not revoke the punishment; because he pursued his brother with the sword, and cast off all pity, and his anger tore perpetually, and he kept his wrath forever.
30:1:11:Therefore, I will send fire upon Teman, and it shall devour the strongholds of Bozrah."
30:1:12:This is what the LORD says: "For three transgressions of Ammon, and for four, I will not revoke the punishment; because they have ripped open pregnant women in Gilead, that they might enlarge their territory.
30:1:13:So I will kindle a fire in the wall of Rabbah, and it shall devour its strongholds, with shouting on the day of battle, with a tempest in the day of the whirlwind;
30:1:14:And their king shall go into exile, he and his princes together," says the LORD.
30:2:1:This is what the LORD says: "For three sins of Moab, even for four, I will not relent. Because they burned the bones of Edom's king to lime,
30:2:2:So I will send fire upon Moab, and it will consume the fortresses of Kerioth. Moab will meet with death amid uproar, battle cries, and trumpet blasts.
30:2:3:I will cut off the ruler from its midst and kill all its officials with him," says the LORD.
30:2:4:Thus declares the LORD: "For three transgressions of Judah, and for four, I will not turn away punishment. Because they have rejected the law of the LORD and have not kept His statutes, their lies have led them astray, those they followed after.
30:2:5:Therefore, I will send fire upon Judah, and it will consume the fortresses of Jerusalem."
30:2:6:The LORD proclaims: "For Israel's three sins, even for four, I will not hold back. Because they sell the righteous for silver, and the needy for a pair of sandals,
30:2:7:They trample on the heads of the poor as on the dust of the ground and deny justice to the oppressed. Father and son use the same girl and so profane My holy name.
30:2:8:Beside every altar, they lay down on garments taken in pledge. In the house of their God, they drink wine obtained through fines.
30:2:9:"Yet it was I who destroyed the Amorites before them, whose height was like the cedars and who were as strong as the oaks; I destroyed their fruit above and their roots below.
30:2:10:It was I who brought you up from the land of Egypt and led you forty years in the wilderness to possess the land of the Amorites.
30:2:11:I raised up prophets from your sons and Nazirites from your young men. Is this not true, people of Israel?" declares the LORD.
30:2:12:"But you made the Nazirites drink wine and commanded the prophets not to prophesy.
30:2:13:Now then, I will crush you as a cart crushes when loaded with grain.
30:2:14:The swift will not escape, the strong will not muster their strength, and the warrior will not save his life.
30:2:15:The archer will not stand his ground, the fleet-footed soldier will not get away, and the horseman will not save his life.
30:2:16:Even the bravest warriors will flee naked on that day," declares the LORD.
30:3:1:Listen to this message that the LORD has spoken against you, people of Israel, against the whole family He brought out of Egypt:
30:3:2:"You alone have I chosen among all the families of the earth; therefore, I will punish you for all your iniquities."
30:3:3:Can two walk together unless they have agreed to do so?
30:3:4:Does a lion roar in the forest when it has no prey? Does a young lion growl from its den if it has not captured anything?
30:3:5:Does a bird fall into a trap on the ground when there is no bait for it? Does a snare spring up from the earth when it has taken nothing at all?
30:3:6:When a trumpet sounds in a city, do not the people tremble? When disaster strikes a city, has not the LORD caused it?
30:3:7:Surely the Sovereign LORD does nothing without revealing His plan to His servants the prophets.
30:3:8:The lion has roared—who will not fear? The Sovereign LORD has spoken—who can but prophesy?
30:3:9:Proclaim to the fortresses of Ashdod and to the fortresses of Egypt: "Assemble yourselves on the mountains of Samaria; see the great unrest within her and the oppression among her people."
30:3:10:They do not know how to do right," declares the LORD, "those who store up violence and destruction in their strongholds."
30:3:11:Therefore, this is what the Sovereign LORD says: "An enemy will overrun your land, pull down your strongholds, and plunder your fortresses."
30:3:12:This is what the LORD says: "As a shepherd rescues from the lion's mouth only two leg bones or a piece of an ear, so will the Israelites living in Samaria be rescued, with only the head of a bed and a piece of fabric from a couch."
30:3:13:Hear this and testify against the house of Jacob," declares the Lord GOD, the God of Hosts.
30:3:14:"On the day I punish Israel for her sins, I will also destroy the altars of Bethel; the horns of the altar will be cut off and fall to the ground.
30:3:15:I will tear down the winter house along with the summer house; the houses adorned with ivory will be destroyed, and the mansions will be demolished," declares the LORD.
30:4:1:Hear this word, you cows of Bashan, who are on the mountain of Samaria, oppressing the poor and crushing the needy, saying to your husbands, "Bring us more to drink!"
30:4:2:The Lord God has sworn by His holiness: the days are coming upon you when they will take you away with hooks, even the last of you with fishhooks.
30:4:3:You will go out through broken walls, each one straight ahead, and be cast into Harmon," declares the Lord.
30:4:4:"Come to Bethel and transgress; to Gilgal and multiply transgression. Bring your sacrifices every morning, and your tithes every three days.
30:4:5:Offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving with leaven! Proclaim and announce the free-will offerings, for this is what you love to do, O people of Israel!" declares the Lord God.
30:4:6:"I gave you empty stomachs in every city and lack of bread in every town, yet you have not returned to me," declares the Lord.
30:4:7:"I also withheld rain from you when there were still three months to the harvest. I sent rain on one town, but withheld it from another. One field had rain; another had none and dried up.
30:4:8:People staggered from town to town for water but did not get enough to drink, yet you have not returned to me," declares the Lord.
30:4:9:"I struck your gardens and vineyards with blight and mildew. Locusts devoured your fig and olive trees, yet you have not returned to me," declares the Lord.
30:4:10:"I sent plagues among you as I did to Egypt. I killed your young men with the sword, along with your captured horses. I filled your nostrils with the stench of your camps, yet you have not returned to me," declares the Lord.
30:4:11:"I overthrew some of you as I overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah. You were like a burning stick snatched from the fire, yet you have not returned to me," declares the Lord.
30:4:12:"Therefore this is what I will do to you, Israel, and because I will do this to you, prepare to meet your God, O Israel."
30:4:13:For He who forms the mountains, creates the wind, and reveals His thoughts to mankind, who turns dawn to darkness, and treads on the heights of the earth— the Lord God Almighty is His name.
30:5:1:Listen to this message, all of you in Israel, the words I speak against you and your entire family, which I brought up from Egypt.
30:5:2:Here's what the Lord says: "Seek me, and you will live."
30:5:3:But don't search for Bethel, or go to Gilgal, or journey to Beersheba. For Gilgal will surely be taken captive, and Bethel will come to nothing.
30:5:4:Seek the Lord, and you will live; otherwise, He will break out like a fire on Joseph's house, and it will consume everything, with no one to put it out in Bethel.
30:5:5:Don't seek Bethel or Gilgal, nor cross over to Beersheba; for Gilgal will certainly be exiled, and Bethel will be reduced to nothing.
30:5:6:Turn to the Lord, and you will live, lest He unleash His anger like a fire, devouring the house of Joseph, with none to douse the flames.
30:5:7:You who turn justice into bitterness and cast righteousness to the ground,
30:5:8:He is the One who made the Pleiades and Orion, who turns deep darkness into morning, and darkens the day into night; who calls for the waters of the sea and pours them out on the earth's surface—His name is the Lord.
30:5:9:He brings destruction upon the strong, so that ruin comes upon the fortress.
30:5:10:They hate those who reprove at the city gate, and they despise those who speak the truth.
30:5:11:Since you trample on the poor and take from them unjust taxes, even though you have built houses of hewn stone, you will not live in them; and though you have planted pleasant vineyards, you won't drink their wine.
30:5:12:For I know your many transgressions and your numerous sins: you oppress the righteous, take bribes, and push aside the needy at the city gate.
30:5:13:Therefore, the prudent remain silent in such times, for these are evil days.
30:5:14:Seek good and not evil, so that you may live; then the Lord, the God of hosts, will be with you, just as you claim.
30:5:15:Hate evil, love good, and establish justice at the city gate; perhaps the Lord, the God of hosts, will show mercy to the remnant of Joseph.
30:5:16:Thus says the Lord, the God of hosts: "In all the squares there will be wailing; and in all the streets they will say, 'Alas! Alas!' They will call the farmer to mourning and those skilled in lamentation to wailing.
30:5:17:In all the vineyards there will be wailing, for I will pass through your midst," says the Lord.
30:5:18:Woe to you who long for the day of the Lord! Why do you want it? The day of the Lord is darkness, not light.
30:5:19:It's like a man who flees from a lion, only to encounter a bear; or enters his house, rests his hand on the wall, and gets bitten by a snake.
30:5:20:Isn't the day of the Lord darkness, not light? Deep gloom, without a ray of brightness?
30:5:21:"I hate, I despise your feasts, and I take no delight in your solemn assemblies.
30:5:22:Even though you offer me burnt offerings and grain offerings, I will not accept them; nor will I regard the peace offerings of your fattened animals.
30:5:23:Take away from me the noise of your songs! I will not listen to the melody of your harps.
30:5:24:But let justice roll down like waters, and righteousness like an ever-flowing stream.
30:5:25:Did you bring me sacrifices and offerings during the forty years in the wilderness, O house of Israel?
30:5:26:You carried the tent of your king and the pedestal of your idols, the star of your god which you made for yourselves.
30:5:27:So I will send you into exile beyond Damascus," says the Lord, whose name is the God of hosts.
30:6:1:Woe to those who are at ease in Zion and feel secure on Mount Samaria, the notable people of the chief nation, to whom the house of Israel comes!
30:6:2:Cross over to Calneh and see; from there go to Hamath the great; then go down to Gath of the Philistines. Are they better off than your two kingdoms? Is their territory larger than yours?
30:6:3:You put off the day of disaster and bring near a reign of violence.
30:6:4:Lying on beds of ivory and lounging on your couches, you dine on choice lambs and fattened calves.
30:6:5:You sing idle songs to the sound of the harp and invent for yourselves musical instruments like David's.
30:6:6:You drink wine by the bowlful and anoint yourselves with the finest oils, but you do not grieve for the ruin of Joseph.
30:6:7:Therefore, you will now go into exile as the first of the captives, and the feasting and lounging will come to an end.
30:6:8:The Lord GOD has sworn by himself, declares the LORD, the God of hosts: I detest the pride of Jacob and hate his strongholds; I will deliver up the city and everything in it.
30:6:9:If ten people remain in one house, they too will die.
30:6:10:And when a relative comes to carry the bodies out of the house and asks someone inside, "Is anyone still with you?" the answer will be, "No." Then the relative will say, "Hush! We must not mention the name of the LORD."
30:6:11:For behold, the LORD commands, and the great house will be smashed to pieces, and the small house to rubble.
30:6:12:Do horses run on rocky cliffs? Do people plow the sea with oxen? Yet you have turned justice into poison and the fruit of righteousness into bitterness—
30:6:13:You who rejoice in the conquest of Lo Debar and say, "Did we not take Karnaim by our own strength?"
30:6:14:For behold, I will raise up against you a nation, O house of Israel, declares the LORD, the God of hosts; they will oppress you from Lebo-hamath to the Brook of the Arabah.
30:7:1:This is what the Lord God showed me: He was forming a swarm of locusts just as the late crop began to sprout, after the king's mowing had taken place.
30:7:2:When they finished eating the vegetation of the land, I said, "Lord God, please forgive! How can Jacob survive? He is so small!"
30:7:3:The Lord relented concerning this. "It will not happen," said the Lord.
30:7:4:Then the Lord God showed me another vision: He was calling for a judgment by fire, and it consumed the great deep and devoured the land.
30:7:5:I cried out, "Lord God, please stop! How can Jacob survive? He is so small!"
30:7:6:The Lord relented concerning this. "This also will not happen," said the Lord.
30:7:7:Next, he showed me a vision of a wall being built with a plumb line in his hand.
30:7:8:The Lord asked me, "What do you see, Amos?" I replied, "A plumb line." Then the Lord said, "I am setting a plumb line among my people Israel; I will no longer overlook their offenses.
30:7:9:Isaac's high places will be destroyed, Israel's sanctuaries will be ruined, and I will rise against Jeroboam's dynasty with the sword."
30:7:10:Amaziah, the priest of Bethel, then sent word to King Jeroboam of Israel, saying, "Amos is plotting against you in the heart of Israel's house. The land cannot bear all his words.
30:7:11:For this is what Amos has said: 'Jeroboam will die by the sword, and Israel will surely go into exile away from their homeland.'"
30:7:12:Amaziah also said to Amos, "Go, you seer! Flee to the land of Judah. Eat your bread there and prophesy there.
30:7:13:But never again prophesy at Bethel, for it is the king's sanctuary and a royal temple."
30:7:14:Amos answered Amaziah, "I am not a prophet or the son of a prophet; I was a shepherd and a tender of fig trees.
30:7:15:But the Lord took me from following the flock and said to me, 'Go, prophesy to my people Israel.'
30:7:16:Now hear the word of the Lord: You say, 'Do not prophesy against Israel or speak against the house of Isaac.'
30:7:17:Therefore, this is what the Lord says: 'Your wife will become a prostitute in the city, your sons and daughters will fall by the sword, your land will be divided by a measuring line, and you yourself will die on unclean soil. Indeed, Israel will go into exile away from its homeland.'"
30:8:1:In a vision, the Lord God showed me a basket of ripe fruit.
30:8:2:He asked, "What do you see, Amos?" I replied, "A basket of ripe fruit." Then the Lord said to me, "The time is ripe for my people Israel; I will not spare them any longer.
30:8:3:On that day," declares the Sovereign Lord, "the songs in the temple will turn to wailing. Many dead bodies will be everywhere; they will be thrown out in silence."
30:8:4:Hear this, you who trample on the needy and bring the poor to ruin,
30:8:5:saying, "When will the New Moon festival be over so we can sell grain? When will the Sabbath end so we can trade wheat, using dishonest scales and small measures?
30:8:6:We will buy the poor with silver and the needy for a pair of sandals, even selling the chaff from the wheat."
30:8:7:The Lord has sworn by the pride of Jacob: "I will never forget any of their deeds.
30:8:8:Because of this, won't the land tremble and everyone living in it mourn? The whole land will rise like the Nile; it will surge and then subside like the river of Egypt.
30:8:9:In that day," declares the Sovereign Lord, "I will make the sun go down at noon and darken the earth in broad daylight.
30:8:10:I will turn your festivals into mourning and all your songs into lamentation; I will cause everyone to wear sackcloth and shave their heads. I will make it like mourning for an only child, and its end like a bitter day.
30:8:11:Look, the days are coming," declares the Sovereign Lord, "when I will send a famine on the land—not a famine of bread or a thirst for water, but a famine of hearing the words of the Lord.
30:8:12:People will wander from sea to sea and from north to east, searching for the word of the Lord, but they will not find it.
30:8:13:On that day, the beautiful young women and strong young men will faint from thirst.
30:8:14:Those who swear by the sin of Samaria and say, 'As your god lives, Dan,' or 'As the way of Beersheba lives,' they will fall, never to rise again."
30:9:1:In a vision, I saw the Lord standing beside the altar. He said, "Strike the top of the temple pillars so that everything shakes. Break them down on the heads of the people below. Those who survive, I will kill with the sword. No one will escape.
30:9:2:Even if they dig deep into the earth or climb to the heavens, my hand will find them and bring them down.
30:9:3:If they hide at the bottom of the sea, I'll command the serpent to bite them.
30:9:4:If they go into captivity before their enemies, I'll order the sword to slay them there. I am determined to bring disaster upon them, not to help them."
30:9:5:The Sovereign Lord of Hosts touches the earth, causing it to melt, and all its inhabitants mourn. The land rises and falls like the Nile, then settles back down like the river of Egypt.
30:9:6:He built his palace in the heavens and established its foundation on the earth. He summons the waters of the sea and pours them over the land. His name is the Lord.
30:9:7:"Are you not like the Ethiopians to me, O people of Israel?" says the Lord. "Did I not bring Israel up from the land of Egypt, the Philistines from Caphtor, and the Syrians from Kir?
30:9:8:Look, the eyes of the Lord God are on the sinful kingdom, and I will destroy it from the face of the earth. But I will not completely destroy the house of Jacob," declares the Lord.
30:9:9:I will give the command, and I will sift the house of Israel among all nations, like grain being shaken in a sieve. Not a pebble will fall to the ground.
30:9:10:All the sinners among my people will die by the sword, those who say, 'Disaster will not overtake or confront us.'
30:9:11:In that day, I will restore David's fallen tent. I will repair its broken places, restore its ruins, and build it as it used to be,
30:9:12:so they may possess the remnant of Edom and all the nations that bear my name," declares the Lord, who will do these things.
30:9:13:The days are coming," says the Lord, "when the plowman will overtake the reaper and the one treading grapes will catch up with the one sowing seed. The mountains will drip with sweet wine, and the hills will flow with it.
30:9:14:I will bring back my exiled people Israel; they will rebuild the ruined cities and inhabit them. They will plant vineyards and drink their wine; they will make gardens and eat their fruit.
30:9:15:I will plant them on their land, and they will never again be uprooted from the land I have given them," says the Lord your God.