31:1:1:The vision of Obadiah. The Lord God says this about Edom: We have heard a message from the Lord, and a messenger has been sent among the nations saying, "Rise up, let us fight against her!"
31:1:2:Look, I will make you small among the nations; you will be utterly despised.
31:1:3:Your arrogant heart has deceived you, you who live in mountain clefts, whose home is high up, thinking, "Who can bring me down to the ground?"
31:1:4:Even if you soar like an eagle, and make your nest among the stars, I will bring you down from there," declares the Lord.
31:1:5:If thieves came to you, or robbers by night—how ruined you would be!—wouldn't they steal only what they wanted? If grape pickers came to you, wouldn't they leave some grapes?
31:1:6:But how Esau's possessions have been searched out, and his hidden treasures discovered!
31:1:7:All your allies have driven you to the border; those who were at peace with you have deceived you and triumphed over you; those who ate your bread have set a trap for you, and you didn't realize it.
31:1:8:On that day, declares the Lord, I will destroy the wise men of Edom, and understanding from Mount Esau.
31:1:9:Your warriors, Teman, will be terrified, and everyone on Mount Esau will be cut down in the slaughter.
31:1:10:Because of the violence done to your brother Jacob, you will be covered with shame and destroyed forever.
31:1:11:When you stood aside on that day when strangers carried off his wealth, and foreigners entered his gates and cast lots for Jerusalem, you were just like one of them.
31:1:12:You should not have gloated over your brother's misfortune on the day of his disaster; you should not have rejoiced over the people of Judah in the day of their destruction; you should not have boasted in the day of distress.
31:1:13:You should not have entered the gate of my people in the day of their calamity; you should not have looked down on their disaster in the day of their ruin, nor have seized their wealth in the day of their distress.
31:1:14:You should not have stood at the crossroads to cut off his fugitives; you should not have handed over his survivors in the day of distress.
31:1:15:For the day of the Lord is near against all the nations. As you have done, it will be done to you; your deeds will return upon your own head.
31:1:16:Just as you drank on my holy mountain, so will all the nations drink continually; they will drink and gulp down, and be as if they had never existed.
31:1:17:But on Mount Zion there will be deliverance, and it will be holy; the house of Jacob will possess its inheritance.
31:1:18:The house of Jacob will be a fire, and the house of Joseph a flame, but the house of Esau will be stubble; they will set them on fire and consume them, and there will be no survivor from the house of Esau, for the Lord has spoken.
31:1:19:People from the Negev will occupy the mountains of Esau, and those from the foothills will possess the land of the Philistines. They will occupy the fields of Ephraim and Samaria, and Benjamin will possess Gilead.
31:1:20:The exiles from Israel who are in Canaan will possess the land as far as Zarephath; the exiles from Jerusalem who are in Sepharad will possess the cities of the Negev.
31:1:21:Saviors will ascend Mount Zion to rule over the mountains of Esau, and the kingdom will be the Lord's.