6:1:1:After the death of Moses, the servant of the Lord, God spoke to Joshua, son of Nun, who had been Moses' assistant.
6:1:2:He said, "My servant Moses is dead. Now you and all the people must prepare to cross the Jordan River into the land I am giving to the Israelites.
6:1:3:Every place where your foot touches, I have given it to you, just as I promised to Moses.
6:1:4:Your territory will extend from the desert and Lebanon in the east to the great river Euphrates, and as far west as the Mediterranean Sea.
6:1:5:No one will be able to stand against you all the days of your life. As I was with Moses, so I will be with you; I will never leave you nor forsake you.
6:1:6:Be strong and courageous, for you will lead these people to inherit the land I swore to their ancestors to give them.
6:1:7:Only be strong and very courageous, being careful to obey all the law that Moses my servant commanded you. Do not turn from it to the right or to the left, so that you may succeed wherever you go.
6:1:8:Keep this Book of the Law always on your lips; meditate on it day and night, so that you may be careful to do everything written in it. Then you will be prosperous and successful.
6:1:9:Have I not commanded you? Be strong and courageous. Do not be afraid; do not be discouraged, for the Lord your God will be with you wherever you go."
6:1:10:Then Joshua commanded the officers of the people:
6:1:11:"Go through the camp and tell the people, 'Prepare your provisions, for within three days you will cross the Jordan River to go in and take possession of the land the Lord your God is giving you.'"
6:1:12:To the Reubenites, Gadites, and half-tribe of Manasseh, Joshua said,
6:1:13:"Remember the command that Moses the servant of the Lord gave you when he said, 'The Lord your God is giving you rest and has granted you this land.'
6:1:14:Your wives, children, and livestock may stay in the land that Moses gave you east of the Jordan, but all your fighting men, ready for battle, must cross over ahead of your fellow Israelites to help them.
6:1:15:Only after the Lord gives them rest, as he has given you, and they too have taken possession of the land the Lord your God is giving them, can you return to the land on the east side of the Jordan, which belongs to you, and enjoy it according to the Lord's command to Moses."
6:1:16:They answered Joshua, "We will do everything you have commanded us and go wherever you send us.
6:1:17:Just as we fully obeyed Moses, so we will obey you. Only may the Lord your God be with you, as he was with Moses.
6:1:18:Anyone who rebels against your orders and does not obey your words, whatever you may command them, will be put to death. Only be strong and courageous!"
6:2:1:After this, Joshua sent two spies out secretly from the Israelite camp near Shittim, with instructions to explore the land, especially Jericho. They went on their mission and arrived at a prostitute's house named Rahab, where they decided to stay.
6:2:2:Someone informed the king of Jericho about the spies, saying, "Some Israelite men have come here tonight to spy on the land."
6:2:3:So the king of Jericho sent orders to Rahab, "Bring out the men who came to you and entered your house, for they have come to spy on our whole land."
6:2:4:But Rahab had taken the two men and hidden them. She said, "Yes, the men were here, but I don't know where they came from."
6:2:5:At dusk, when it was time to close the city gate, the men left. I don't know which way they went. Hurry, chase after them, and you might catch up to them."
6:2:6:However, she had brought them up to the roof and hidden them under stalks of flax that she had laid out there.
6:2:7:The king's men pursued the spies along the road leading to the Jordan River, as far as the fords. As soon as they had gone out, the city gate was shut.
6:2:8:Before the spies settled down for the night, Rahab went up to the roof.
6:2:9:She told them, "I know that the Lord has given you this land, and that the fear of you has fallen upon us. All the inhabitants of the land are melting in fear because of you."
6:2:10:"We've heard how the Lord dried up the Red Sea's water when you came out of Egypt, and what you did to the two Amorite kings on the other side of the Jordan, Sihon and Og, whom you completely destroyed."
6:2:11:"As soon as we heard this, our hearts melted, and everyone's courage failed because of you. For the Lord your God is God in heaven above and on earth below."
6:2:12:"Now, please swear to me by the Lord that you will show kindness to my family, since I have shown kindness to you. Give me a sure sign."
6:2:13:"That you will spare the lives of my father, mother, brothers, sisters, and all who belong to them, and that you will save us from death."
6:2:14:The men answered her, "Our lives for yours! If you don't tell anyone about our mission, we will treat you kindly and faithfully when the Lord gives us the land."
6:2:15:Then Rahab let them down by a rope through the window, for her house was built into the city wall, so she lived within the wall.
6:2:16:She told them, "Go to the hills, so your pursuers won't find you. Hide there for three days until they return, then you can go on your way."
6:2:17:The men said to her, "We will be released from the oath you made us swear."
6:2:18:"When we enter the land, tie this scarlet cord in the window through which you let us down, and bring your father, mother, brothers, and your entire family into your house."
6:2:19:"If anyone goes outside your house, their blood will be on their own head, and we will not be responsible. But if anyone inside the house is harmed, their blood will be on our head."
6:2:20:"If you tell anyone about our mission, we will be released from the oath you made us swear."
6:2:21:Rahab agreed, "Let it be as you say." She sent them away, and they departed. Then she tied the scarlet cord in the window.
6:2:22:The spies went to the hills and stayed there for three days until their pursuers returned. The pursuers had searched all along the road but found nothing.
6:2:23:Afterward, the two spies came down from the hills, crossed the Jordan River, and reported everything to Joshua.
6:2:24:They told him, "The Lord has indeed given the whole land into our hands; all the people are terrified of us."
6:3:1:After this, Joshua rose early in the morning and he, along with all the Israelites, left Shittim and went to the Jordan River, where they camped before crossing over.
6:3:2:For three days they stayed at the camp beside the river.
6:3:3:Then, the officers went throughout the camp,
6:3:4:giving orders to the people, "When you see the ark of the covenant of the Lord your God being carried by the Levitical priests, you must break camp and follow it.
6:3:5:However, keep a distance of about two thousand cubits between you and the ark. Do not go near it, so that you can clearly see the way to go, since you have never traveled this route before."
6:3:6:Joshua told the people, "Consecrate yourselves, for tomorrow the Lord will do amazing things among you."
6:3:7:And the Lord said to Joshua, "Today I will begin to exalt you in the eyes of all Israel, so they may know that I am with you just as I was with Moses.
6:3:8:Instruct the priests carrying the ark of the covenant to take a few steps into the Jordan River ahead of the people."
6:3:9:So Joshua commanded the Israelites, "Come here and listen to the words of the Lord your God.
6:3:10:This is how you will know that the living God is among you and that he will certainly drive out before you the Canaanites, Hittites, Hivites, Perizzites, Girgashites, Amorites, and Jebusites.
6:3:11:Look, the ark of the covenant of the Lord of all the earth will go into the Jordan ahead of you.
6:3:12:Now choose twelve men from the tribes of Israel, one from each tribe.
6:3:13:As soon as the priests carrying the ark of the Lord—the Lord of all the earth—set foot in the Jordan, its waters flowing downstream will be cut off and stand up in a heap."
6:3:14:So when the people broke camp to cross the Jordan, the priests carrying the ark of the covenant went ahead of them.
6:3:15:Now the Jordan is at flood stage all during harvest. Yet as soon as the priests who carried the ark reached the Jordan and their feet touched the water's edge,
6:3:16:the water from upstream stopped flowing. It piled up in a heap a great distance away, at a town called Adam in the vicinity of Zarethan, while the water flowing down to the Sea of the Arabah (that is, the Dead Sea) was completely cut off. So the people crossed over opposite Jericho.
6:3:17:The priests who carried the ark of the covenant of the Lord stood firm on dry ground in the middle of the Jordan, while all Israel passed by until the whole nation had completed the crossing on dry ground.
6:4:1:After the Israelites had crossed the Jordan River, the Lord spoke to Joshua.
6:4:2:"Choose twelve men from the people, one from each tribe,"
6:4:3:and instruct them to take twelve stones from the middle of the river, right where the priests stood with the Ark of the Covenant. Carry these stones with you,
6:4:4:and place them in your camp tonight."
6:4:5:So Joshua called for the twelve men he had chosen from among the Israelites and told them,
6:4:6:"Go to the center of the Jordan River, where the Ark of the Covenant is, and pick up a stone for each tribe, twelve stones in total, as a sign for future generations.
6:4:7:These stones will serve as a reminder of what happened here today. When your children ask you about them in the future,
6:4:8:you will tell them how the waters of the Jordan were cut off before the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, and how the river dried up so that we could cross over on dry ground.
6:4:9:The twelve men did as they were instructed, taking the stones from the middle of the Jordan River, just as the Lord had commanded Joshua. They carried the stones to their camp and placed them there.
6:4:10:Meanwhile, the priests carrying the Ark remained standing in the middle of the river until all the commands the Lord had given to Joshua were carried out, and the people finished crossing.
6:4:11:When everyone had crossed, the Ark of the Covenant and the priests came up from the middle of the Jordan.
6:4:12:The Reubenites, Gadites, and half-tribe of Manasseh, who had already received their land on the east side of the Jordan, crossed over in full battle gear ahead of their fellow Israelites, as Moses had instructed them.
6:4:13:About forty thousand armed soldiers crossed over before the Lord, ready for battle, and marched towards Jericho.
6:4:14:That day, the Lord made Joshua a great leader in the eyes of all Israel, and they respected him just as they had respected Moses during his life.
6:4:15:The Lord then said to Joshua,
6:4:16:"Command the priests carrying the Ark of the Testimony to come up from the Jordan River."
6:4:17:So Joshua commanded the priests, "Come up from the Jordan."
6:4:18:As soon as the priests carrying the Ark reached the riverbank and their feet touched dry ground, the waters of the Jordan returned to their place, flowing once again as they had before.
6:4:19:The people crossed the Jordan on the tenth day of the first month and camped at Gilgal, on the eastern border of Jericho.
6:4:20:There, Joshua set up the twelve stones they had taken from the Jordan River.
6:4:21:He told the Israelites, "In the future, when your children ask you about these stones,
6:4:22:you will tell them that Israel crossed the Jordan on dry ground.
6:4:23:For the Lord your God dried up the waters of the Jordan until you had crossed over, just as He did with the Red Sea, which He dried up before us until we had crossed it.
6:4:24:This was done so that all the people of the earth might know the power of the Lord and that you might always fear the Lord your God."
6:5:1:After the Israelites had crossed the Jordan River, the Lord told Joshua to have the men circumcised.
6:5:2:So Joshua made flint knives and circumcised the Israelite men at a place called Gibeath Haaraloth.
6:5:3:The reason for this circumcision was that all the men who had left Egypt, the ones who were warriors, had died during their journey through the wilderness.
6:5:4:These men had been circumcised, but those born in the wilderness during the journey from Egypt had not.
6:5:5:For forty years, the Israelites traveled through the wilderness until all the fighting men who had left Egypt passed away, as they hadn't obeyed the Lord's command. 
6:5:6:But now, Joshua circumcised their sons, the ones the Lord had given to replace their fathers.
6:5:7:Once the circumcision was complete, the people stayed in the camp to recover.
6:5:8:When they were healed, the Lord said to Joshua, "Today I have rolled away the disgrace of Egypt from you." That is why the place is called Gilgal to this day.
6:5:9:On the evening of the fourteenth day of the month, while camped at Gilgal on the plains of Jericho, the Israelites celebrated Passover.
6:5:10:The day after Passover, they ate some of the produce of the land, including unleavened bread and roasted grain.
6:5:11:From that day on, the manna stopped appearing, since they were now eating from the crops of Canaan.
6:5:12:As Joshua was near Jericho, he looked up and saw a man standing in front of him with a drawn sword. Joshua approached him and asked, "Are you for us or for our enemies?"
6:5:13:The man replied, "Neither. I am the commander of the Lord's army. I have come now." Joshua fell facedown to the ground in reverence and asked, "What message does my Lord have for his servant?"
6:5:14:The commander of the Lord's army said, "Take off your sandals, for the place where you are standing is holy." And Joshua did as he was told.
6:6:1:Now, Jericho was tightly shut because of the Israelites; no one went out or came in.
6:6:2:The LORD said to Joshua, "See, I have given Jericho into your hands, along with its king and its fighting men. 
6:6:3:You and your soldiers shall march around the city once a day for six days. 
6:6:4:Seven priests will carry seven trumpets made from rams' horns in front of the ark. On the seventh day, you shall march around the city seven times, and the priests shall blow the trumpets. 
6:6:5:When they give a long blast on the ram's horn, and when you hear the trumpet sound, all the people shall shout loudly. Then the city wall will collapse, and the people will go up, each one straight ahead." 
6:6:6:So Joshua, son of Nun, summoned the priests and said to them, "Take up the ark of the covenant, and let seven priests carry seven trumpets made from rams' horns in front of the ark of the LORD." 
6:6:7:He told the people, "Move forward, march around the city, and let the armed men go ahead of the ark of the LORD." 
6:6:8:As Joshua had commanded the people, the seven priests carrying the seven trumpets made from rams' horns before the LORD moved forward and blew the trumpets, and the ark of the covenant of the LORD followed them. 
6:6:9:The armed men went ahead of the priests who blew the trumpets, and the rear guard followed the ark, with the trumpets sounding continuously. 
6:6:10:But Joshua had instructed the people, "Do not shout or make any noise with your voice, nor let a word proceed from your mouth until the day I tell you to shout. Then you shall shout." 
6:6:11:So he had the ark of the LORD circle the city, going around it once; then they returned to the camp and spent the night there. 
6:6:12:Joshua got up early the next morning, and the priests took up the ark of the LORD. 
6:6:13:The seven priests carrying the seven trumpets made from rams' horns before the ark of the LORD went on continually, blowing the trumpets. The armed men went ahead of them, and the rear guard followed the ark of the LORD, with the trumpets sounding continuously. 
6:6:14:They marched around the city once on the second day and returned to the camp. They did this for six days. 
6:6:15:On the seventh day, they got up at dawn and marched around the city in the same manner seven times. It was only on that day that they marched around the city seven times. 
6:6:16:At the seventh time, when the priests blew the trumpets, Joshua said to the people, "Shout! For the LORD has given you the city. 
6:6:17:The city and everything in it are to be devoted to the LORD for destruction. Only Rahab the prostitute and all who are with her in her house shall live because she hid the spies we sent. 
6:6:18:But keep away from the devoted things, lest you make yourselves accursed by taking any of them, and bring disaster on the camp of Israel. 
6:6:19:All the silver and gold, as well as the articles of bronze and iron, are holy to the LORD; they must go into the treasury of the LORD." 
6:6:20:So the people shouted, and the trumpets were blown. As soon as the people heard the trumpet sound, they raised a great shout, and the wall collapsed. The people charged straight ahead into the city and captured it. 
6:6:21:They devoted everything in the city to destruction—men and women, young and old, cattle, sheep, and donkeys—by the edge of the sword. 
6:6:22:Joshua said to the two men who had spied out the land, "Go into the prostitute's house and bring out the woman and all who belong to her, as you swore to her." 
6:6:23:The spies went in and brought out Rahab, her father, mother, brothers, and all who belonged to her. They brought out her whole family and put them in a place outside the camp of Israel. 
6:6:24:Then they burned the city and everything in it, but they put the silver, gold, and articles of bronze and iron into the treasury of the LORD's house. 
6:6:25:Because Rahab the prostitute had hidden the spies Joshua sent, Joshua spared her life and the lives of her family. She has lived among the Israelites to this day.
6:6:26:At that time, Joshua pronounced this solemn oath: "Cursed before the LORD is the one who undertakes to rebuild this city, Jericho: At the cost of his firstborn son he will lay its foundations; at the cost of his youngest he will set up its gates." 
6:6:27:So the LORD was with Joshua, and his fame spread throughout the land.
6:7:1:But the Israelites violated the sacred ban. Achan, son of Carmi, grandson of Zabdi, great-grandson of Zerah from the tribe of Judah, took some of the devoted things. The Lord's anger burned against Israel.
6:7:2:Joshua sent men from Jericho to Ai, which is near Beth-aven, east of Bethel, and told them, "Go up and scout the land." So the men went up and spied on Ai.
6:7:3:When they returned to Joshua, they said, "There's no need for all the people to go up; only about two or three thousand men should attack Ai. Don't make everyone go, because they are few."
6:7:4:So about three thousand men went up there from the people, but they fled before the men of Ai.
6:7:5:The men of Ai struck down about thirty-six of them, chasing them from outside the gate as far as Shebarim, and defeating them at the descent. The hearts of the people melted and became like water.
6:7:6:Joshua tore his clothes and fell facedown to the ground before the ark of the Lord until evening, he and the elders of Israel; and they put dust on their heads.
6:7:7:"Oh, Sovereign Lord," Joshua cried out, "why did you ever bring this people across the Jordan to hand us over to the Amorites and destroy us? If only we had been content to stay on the other side of the Jordan!
6:7:8:Lord, what can I say now that Israel has turned their backs and run from their enemies?
6:7:9:When the Canaanites and all who live in the land hear about it, they will surround us and wipe out our name from the earth. What then will you do for your great name?"
6:7:10:The Lord said to Joshua, "Stand up! Why have you fallen on your face?
6:7:11:Israel has sinned; they have violated my covenant that I commanded them. They have taken some of the devoted things; they have stolen and lied, hiding them among their own possessions.
6:7:12:That is why the Israelites cannot stand against their enemies; they turn their backs and run because they are under a curse. I will not be with you anymore unless you destroy whatever is devoted to destruction among you.
6:7:13:Get up, consecrate the people, and say, 'Consecrate yourselves for tomorrow, for this is what the Lord, the God of Israel, says: There are devoted things among you, Israel. You cannot stand against your enemies until you remove them.
6:7:14:In the morning, present yourselves tribe by tribe. The tribe the Lord chooses will come forward clan by clan; the clan the Lord chooses will come forward family by family; and the family the Lord chooses will come forward man by man.
6:7:15:Whoever is caught with the devoted things must be burned, along with all that belongs to him, because he has violated the covenant of the Lord and has committed an outrage in Israel.'"
6:7:16:Early the next morning, Joshua had Israel come forward by tribes, and Judah was chosen.
6:7:17:He had the clans of Judah come forward, and the Zerahites were chosen. He had the clan of the Zerahites come forward by families, and Zabdi was chosen.
6:7:18:Joshua had his family come forward man by man, and Achan son of Carmi, son of Zabdi, son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, was chosen.
6:7:19:Then Joshua said to Achan, "My son, give glory to the Lord, the God of Israel, and honor him. Tell me what you have done; do not hide it from me."
6:7:20:Achan replied, "It is true! I have sinned against the Lord, the God of Israel. This is what I did:
6:7:21:When I saw among the spoils a beautiful robe from Babylon, two hundred shekels of silver, and a bar of gold weighing fifty shekels, I coveted them and took them. They are hidden in the ground inside my tent, with the silver underneath."
6:7:22:So Joshua sent messengers, who ran to the tent, and there it was, hidden in his tent, with the silver underneath.
6:7:23:They took the things from the tent, brought them to Joshua and all the Israelites, and laid them out before the Lord.
6:7:24:Then Joshua, together with all Israel, took Achan son of Zerah, the silver, the robe, the gold bar, his sons and daughters, his cattle, donkeys and sheep, his tent and everything he had, to the Valley of Achor.
6:7:25:Joshua said, "Why have you brought this trouble on us? The Lord will bring trouble on you today." Then all Israel stoned him, and after they had stoned the rest, they burned them.
6:7:26:Over Achan they heaped up a large pile of rocks, which remains to this day. Then the Lord turned from his fierce anger. Therefore that place has been called the Valley of Achor ever since.
6:8:1:Then the Lord said to Joshua, "Don't be afraid or discouraged. Take all your fighting men and go up against Ai. I have given the king of Ai, his people, his city, and his land into your hands.
6:8:2:You will do to Ai and its king what you did to Jericho and its king, but this time you can take the spoils and livestock for yourselves. Set an ambush behind the city."
6:8:3:So Joshua and his whole army moved out to attack Ai. He chose 30,000 of his best warriors and sent them out at night.
6:8:4:He instructed them, "Pay attention! You will set an ambush behind the city. Don't go too far from it, and be ready for action.
6:8:5:I, along with the rest of the troops, will approach the city from the front. When they come out to meet us as they did before, we'll retreat and lure them away from the city.
6:8:6:They will think we are running away from them, just like the first time. While we're doing that, you'll come out of hiding and take the city, for the Lord your God will give it to you.
6:8:7:Once you've captured the city, set it on fire, just as the Lord has commanded. Those are your orders."
6:8:8:Joshua sent them off, and they went to their ambush site, waiting between Bethel and Ai, west of Ai. Joshua spent that night with the troops.
6:8:9:Early the next morning, Joshua mustered his army and set out with the elders of Israel in front of the troops.
6:8:10:When they reached Ai, Joshua led his force to the north of the city, with a valley separating them.
6:8:11:He positioned about 5,000 men as a rear guard west of the city, between Ai and Bethel.
6:8:12:The soldiers were positioned so that the main camp to the north of the city was hidden from view, while the rear guard was to the west.
6:8:13:That night, Joshua went into the valley.
6:8:14:When the king of Ai saw this, he and his people hurried out early in the morning to engage Israel in battle at a specified location. But the king didn't know there was an ambush waiting for him behind the city.
6:8:15:Joshua and all Israel pretended to be defeated and started retreating toward the wilderness.
6:8:16:All the men in the city were called to pursue them, and as they chased Joshua, they were drawn away from the city.
6:8:17:Not a single person remained in Ai or Bethel; everyone went after Israel. They left the city wide open, not realizing they were being lured away.
6:8:18:Then the Lord told Joshua, "Stretch out the javelin in your hand toward Ai, for I will give it into your hands." So Joshua stretched out his javelin toward the city.
6:8:19:The ambush force came out of hiding, rushed into the city, captured it, and quickly set it on fire.
6:8:20:When the people of Ai looked back, they saw smoke rising from their city. They had nowhere to escape because the Israelites who had been retreating now turned to fight.
6:8:21:Joshua and his troops saw that the ambush had taken the city and that smoke was rising. They turned around and attacked the men of Ai.
6:8:22:The rear guard also came out of the city to join the fight, so the people of Ai were caught in the middle, with Israelites on both sides. The Israelites killed all of them, not letting any escape or survive.
6:8:23:They captured the king of Ai alive and brought him to Joshua.
6:8:24:When the fighting was over and all the people of Ai were dead, the Israelites went back and killed everyone still hiding in the city.
6:8:25:On that day, 12,000 men and women of Ai were killed, including the king.
6:8:26:Joshua kept his javelin pointed at the city until every last person in Ai was destroyed.
6:8:27:But the Israelites took the livestock and the spoils of the city as their own, just as the Lord had instructed Joshua.
6:8:28:Joshua burned Ai and made it a permanent heap of ruins, a desolate place to this day.
6:8:29:He hanged the king of Ai on a tree and left his body there until evening. At sunset, Joshua ordered the body to be taken down from the tree and thrown at the entrance of the city gate. They piled a large heap of stones over it, which remains there to this day.
6:8:30:Then Joshua built an altar to the Lord, the God of Israel, on Mount Ebal.
6:8:31:He built it according to the instructions Moses, the servant of the Lord, had given the Israelites, as written in the Book of the Law of Moses: "an altar of uncut stones, not shaped by iron tools." On it, they offered burnt offerings to the Lord and sacrificed fellowship offerings.
6:8:32:There, in the presence of the Israelites, Joshua copied onto the stones the law that Moses had written.
6:8:33:All Israel, including the foreigners living among them, stood on opposite sides of the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord. Half of the people were in front of Mount Gerizim and half in front of Mount Ebal, as Moses, the servant of the Lord, had commanded earlier, to bless the people of Israel.
6:8:34:Afterward, Joshua read all the words of the law—the blessings and the curses—just as it is written in the Book of the Law.
6:8:35:Every command that Moses had given was read by Joshua in the hearing of the entire assembly, including women, children, and the foreigners living among them.
6:9:1:The Gibeonites, having heard what Joshua had done to Jericho and Ai,
6:9:2:decided to use a clever strategy to make peace with Israel. They pretended to be ambassadors from a distant country.
6:9:3:They packed old sacks on their donkeys, worn-out wineskins that were cracked and mended,
6:9:4:and put on worn-out clothes. Their sandals were patched, and their bread was dry and crumbly.
6:9:5:Then they went to Joshua in the camp at Gilgal and said to him and the Israelites, "We have come from a faraway land; please make a treaty with us."
6:9:6:The Israelites asked the Gibeonites, "How do we know you're not our neighbors living nearby? We cannot make a treaty with you."
6:9:7:But they replied to Joshua, "We are your servants." Joshua asked, "Who are you, and where do you come from?"
6:9:8:They answered, "Your servants have come from a very distant country because of the fame of the Lord your God. We've heard about all he did in Egypt
6:9:9:and everything he did to the two Amorite kings east of the Jordan: Sihon king of Heshbon and Og king of Bashan, who lived in Ashtaroth.
6:9:10:So our elders and all the people of our country told us, 'Take provisions for your journey, go meet the Israelites, and say to them, "We are your servants; please make a treaty with us."'
6:9:11:This bread of ours was warm when we packed it at home on the day we left to come to you. But now, look, it's dry and crumbly.
6:9:12:These wineskins were new when we filled them, but now they're cracked. Our clothes and sandals are worn out from the long journey."
6:9:13:The Israelites sampled their provisions but did not consult the Lord.
6:9:14:So Joshua made peace with them and agreed to a treaty, letting them live; the leaders of the congregation swore an oath to them.
6:9:15:Three days after making the treaty with the Gibeonites, the Israelites learned that they were actually their neighbors living nearby.
6:9:16:So the Israelites set out and reached their cities on the third day. These cities were Gibeon, Chephirah, Beeroth, and Kiriath Jearim.
6:9:17:But the Israelites did not attack them because the leaders of the congregation had sworn an oath to them by the Lord, the God of Israel. The whole congregation grumbled against the leaders.
6:9:18:However, all the leaders told the congregation, "We have sworn an oath to them by the Lord, the God of Israel, so we cannot touch them now.
6:9:19:We must let them live because of the oath we swore to them, or else the Lord's wrath will be upon us. Let them live."
6:9:20:So the leaders promised to spare their lives but decided to make them woodcutters and water carriers for the whole congregation, as the leaders had vowed to them.
6:9:21:Joshua summoned the Gibeonites and said, "Why did you deceive us by saying you were from a distant country when you actually live near us?
6:9:22:Because of this, you are now under a curse, and your people will never cease to be woodcutters and water carriers for the house of my God."
6:9:23:The Gibeonites answered, "We did it because we were afraid for our lives. We heard that the Lord your God had commanded his servant Moses to give you the whole land and destroy all its inhabitants. So we deceived you to save ourselves.
6:9:24:Now we are in your hands; do with us whatever seems good and right to you."
6:9:25:Joshua spared their lives and protected them from the Israelites, so they became woodcutters and water carriers for the congregation and the altar of the Lord at the place the Lord would choose. And they still do this work today.
6:10:1:When Adoni-Zedek, the king of Jerusalem, heard that Joshua had captured Ai and destroyed it, declaring it under a curse just as he had done to Jericho and its king, he became very worried.
6:10:2:Adoni-Zedek learned that the people of Gibeon had made peace with Israel and were now their allies. He and his people were alarmed because Gibeon was an important city, like one of the royal cities; it was larger than Ai, and all its men were strong warriors.
6:10:3:So King Adoni-Zedek of Jerusalem sent messages to the kings of Hebron, Jarmuth, Lachish, and Eglon, saying:
6:10:4:"Come and help me attack Gibeon, for they have made peace with Joshua and the Israelites."
6:10:5:The five Amorite kings—the kings of Jerusalem, Hebron, Jarmuth, Lachish, and Eglon—joined forces and advanced with all their armies. They camped near Gibeon and prepared to fight against it.
6:10:6:The Gibeonites sent word to Joshua at his camp in Gilgal, saying, "Don't abandon your servants! Come quickly and save us! All the Amorite kings from the hill country have joined together against us."
6:10:7:So Joshua marched up from Gilgal with his entire army, including the best fighting men.
6:10:8:The Lord said to Joshua, "Do not be afraid of them, for I have handed them over to you. Not one of them will be able to stand against you."
6:10:9:Joshua attacked them suddenly, marching all night from Gilgal.
6:10:10:The Lord threw the enemy into confusion before Israel, and they defeated them in a great battle near Gibeon. The Israelites chased them along the road that goes up to Beth Horon and struck them down as far as Azekah and Makkedah.
6:10:11:As the enemy fled before Israel on the road down from Beth Horon to Azekah, the Lord hurled large hailstones from the sky, killing more of them than the Israelites killed with the sword.
6:10:12:On the day the Lord gave the Amorites over to Israel, Joshua prayed to the Lord in the presence of all Israel, saying, "Sun, stand still over Gibeon, and moon, over the Valley of Aijalon."
6:10:13:So the sun stood still, and the moon stopped, until the nation avenged itself on its enemies. This event is recorded in the Book of Jashar. The sun stopped in the middle of the sky and delayed going down for about a full day.
6:10:14:There has never been a day like it before or since when the Lord listened to the voice of a man. Surely, the Lord was fighting for Israel!
6:10:15:Then Joshua returned with all Israel to the camp at Gilgal.
6:10:16:Now the five kings had fled and hidden themselves in a cave at Makkedah.
6:10:17:When Joshua was told that the five kings had been found hiding in the cave at Makkedah,
6:10:18:he said, "Roll large stones against the mouth of the cave and station men there to guard it.
6:10:19:But don't stay there yourselves; pursue your enemies and attack them from the rear. Don't let them reach their cities, for the Lord your God has handed them over to you."
6:10:20:So Joshua and the Israelites defeated them completely, but a few survivors managed to reach their fortified cities.
6:10:21:The whole army then returned safely to Joshua in the camp at Makkedah, and no one uttered a word against the Israelites.
6:10:22:Joshua said, "Open the mouth of the cave and bring those five kings out to me."
6:10:23:So they brought the five kings out of the cave—the kings of Jerusalem, Hebron, Jarmuth, Lachish, and Eglon.
6:10:24:When they had brought these kings to Joshua, he summoned all the men of Israel and said to the army commanders who had accompanied him, "Come here and put your feet on the necks of these kings." So they came forward and placed their feet on their necks.
6:10:25:Joshua said to them, "Do not be afraid or discouraged. Be strong and courageous, for this is what the Lord will do to all the enemies you are going to fight."
6:10:26:Then Joshua struck down and killed the kings, and he hung them on five trees. They were left hanging on the trees until evening.
6:10:27:At sunset, Joshua ordered their bodies to be taken down from the trees and thrown into the cave where they had hidden. Large stones were placed at the mouth of the cave, and they remain there to this day.
6:10:28:That day, Joshua captured Makkedah and struck it with the sword, along with its king. He completely destroyed the city and everyone in it, leaving no survivors. He did to the king of Makkedah as he had done to the king of Jericho.
6:10:29:Then Joshua and all Israel moved on from Makkedah to Libnah and attacked it.
6:10:30:The Lord also handed Libnah and its king over to Israel. Joshua struck it with the sword, including its king and every person in it, leaving no survivors. He did to its king what he had done to the king of Jericho.
6:10:31:Next, Joshua and all Israel moved on from Libnah to Lachish. They camped near it and attacked it.
6:10:32:The Lord handed Lachish over to Israel, and Joshua took it on the second day. He struck it with the sword, along with every person in it, just as he had done to Libnah.
6:10:33:At that time, Horam king of Gezer came up to help Lachish, but Joshua defeated him and his people, leaving no survivors.
6:10:34:Then Joshua and all Israel moved on from Lachish to Eglon. They camped near it and attacked it.
6:10:35:They captured it that same day and struck it with the sword, completely destroying every person in it, just as they had done to Lachish.
6:10:36:From Eglon, Joshua and all Israel went up to Hebron and attacked it.
6:10:37:They captured it and struck it with the sword, along with its king, all its surrounding towns, and every person in them. Joshua left no survivors, just as he had done at Eglon. He completely destroyed Hebron and everyone in it.
6:10:38:Finally, Joshua and all Israel turned toward Debir and attacked it.
6:10:39:He captured it, its king, and all its surrounding towns, and struck them with the sword. He completely destroyed every person in them, leaving no survivors. He did to Debir and its king what he had done to Hebron and what he had done to Libnah and its king.
6:10:40:So Joshua conquered the entire region—the hill country, the Negev, the western foothills, and the mountain slopes, along with all their kings. He left no survivors, but completely destroyed every living thing, as the Lord, the God of Israel, had commanded.
6:10:41:Joshua defeated the kings from Kadesh Barnea to Gaza, and the whole land of Goshen up to Gibeon.
6:10:42:Joshua captured all these kings and their lands in one campaign because the Lord, the God of Israel, fought for Israel.
6:10:43:Then Joshua returned with all Israel to the camp at Gilgal.
6:11:1:In the northern region, Jabin, king of Hazor, heard about Israel's victories. He sent messages to unite several kings from nearby cities.
6:11:2:These included the kings of Madon, Shimron, and Achshaph,
6:11:3:as well as those in the north, in the mountains, in the Arabah south of Chinneroth, in the lowland, and in the heights of Dor on the west.
6:11:4:They joined forces with the Canaanites, Amorites, Hittites, Perizzites, Jebusites in the hill country, and the Hivites at the base of Hermon in the land of Mizpah.
6:11:5:All these kings came together, forming a vast army with many horses and chariots, ready to fight against Israel.
6:11:6:The Lord said to Joshua, "Don't be afraid of them, because by this time tomorrow, I will deliver all of them, slain, to Israel. You are to hamstring their horses and burn their chariots."
6:11:7:So Joshua and his entire army attacked them suddenly by the waters of Merom.
6:11:8:The Lord handed them over to the Israelites, who struck them down and chased them all the way to Greater Sidon, Misrephoth Maim, and the Valley of Mizpah to the east, until none were left.
6:11:9:Joshua did as the Lord had instructed him: he hamstrung their horses and burned their chariots.
6:11:10:Then Joshua turned back and captured Hazor, killing its king with the sword. Hazor was once the head of all those kingdoms.
6:11:11:They put everyone in the city to the sword, completely destroying them. Nothing that breathed was left alive, and Hazor itself was burned.
6:11:12:Joshua captured all these royal cities and their kings, striking them with the edge of the sword. He devoted them to destruction, as Moses, the servant of the Lord, had commanded.
6:11:13:However, Israel did not burn any of the cities built on mounds, except for Hazor, which Joshua burned.
6:11:14:The Israelites took all the plunder and livestock from these cities but put every person to the sword until they were destroyed, leaving no survivors.
6:11:15:As the Lord had commanded his servant Moses, so Moses commanded Joshua, and Joshua followed through. He left nothing undone of all that the Lord had commanded Moses.
6:11:16:So Joshua took this entire land: the hill country, all the Negev, the whole region of Goshen, the lowland, the Arabah, the hill country of Israel, and its lowland.
6:11:17:From Mount Halak, which rises toward Seir, to Baal Gad in the Valley of Lebanon at the foot of Mount Hermon, he captured all their kings and struck them down, putting them to death.
6:11:18:Joshua waged war against these kings for a long time.
6:11:19:No city made peace with the Israelites except the Hivites living in Gibeon; all others were taken in battle.
6:11:20:For it was the Lord's intention to harden their hearts so they would engage Israel in battle, be completely destroyed without mercy, and be annihilated, just as the Lord had commanded Moses.
6:11:21:At that time, Joshua also eliminated the Anakim from the hill country, from Hebron, Debir, Anab, and all the hill country of Judah and Israel. Joshua devoted them and their cities to destruction.
6:11:22:No Anakim were left in the land of the Israelites; only in Gaza, Gath, and Ashdod did some remain.
6:11:23:So Joshua took the entire land, just as the Lord had directed Moses, and he gave it as an inheritance to Israel according to their tribal divisions. Then the land had rest from war.
6:12:1:Now these are the kings of the land whom the Israelites defeated and took possession of their land beyond the Jordan, to the east, from the Arnon River to Mount Hermon, including all the eastern side of the Arabah:
6:12:2:Sihon king of the Amorites, who lived in Heshbon and ruled from Aroer, which is on the edge of the Arnon River, and from the middle of the valley as far as the Jabbok River, the border of the Ammonites, and included half of Gilead,
6:12:3:and the eastern Arabah up to the Sea of Chinnereth, eastward toward the Sea of the Arabah (that is, the Dead Sea), below the slopes of Pisgah.
6:12:4:Og king of Bashan was also defeated, one of the last of the Rephaim, who lived at Ashtaroth and Edrei
6:12:5:and ruled over Mount Hermon, Salecah, and all of Bashan up to the border of the Geshurites and the Maacathites, and half of Gilead to the border of Sihon king of Heshbon.
6:12:6:Moses, the servant of the LORD, and the Israelites had defeated them, and Moses, the servant of the LORD, gave their land as an inheritance to the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh.
6:12:7:These are the kings of the land that Joshua and the Israelites conquered on the west side of the Jordan, from Baal-gad in the Valley of Lebanon to Mount Halak, which rises toward Seir. Joshua gave this land to the tribes of Israel as their inheritance,
6:12:8:including the hill country, the western foothills, the Arabah, the mountain slopes, the wilderness, and the Negev. These lands belonged to the Hittites, Amorites, Canaanites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites.
6:12:9:The king of Jericho was defeated, as well as the king of Ai, which is near Bethel,
6:12:10:the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron,
6:12:11:the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish,
6:12:12:the king of Eglon, the king of Gezer,
6:12:13:the king of Debir, the king of Geder,
6:12:14:the king of Hormah, the king of Arad,
6:12:15:the king of Libnah, the king of Adullam,
6:12:16:the king of Makkedah, the king of Bethel,
6:12:17:the king of Tappuah, the king of Hepher,
6:12:18:the king of Aphek, the king of Lasharon,
6:12:19:the king of Madon, the king of Hazor,
6:12:20:the king of Shimron-meron, the king of Achshaph,
6:12:21:the king of Taanach, the king of Megiddo,
6:12:22:the king of Kedesh, the king of Jokneam in Carmel,
6:12:23:the king of Dor in Naphath-dor, the king of Goiim in Gilgal,
6:12:24:and the king of Tirzah. In total, Joshua defeated thirty-one kings.
6:13:1:Now Joshua was getting old and advanced in years, but there were still large areas of land to be taken over.
6:13:2:This is the territory that remained: all the regions of the Philistines and all the Geshurites;
6:13:3:from the Shihor River on the east of Egypt to the territory of Ekron on the north, considered as Canaanite; the five Philistine rulers of Gaza, Ashdod, Ashkelon, Gath, and Ekron, as well as the Avvites;
6:13:4:in the south, all the land of the Canaanites, from Arah of the Sidonians to Aphek, and the area of the Amorites;
6:13:5:the territory of the Gebalites and all Lebanon to the east, from Baal Gad at the foot of Mount Hermon to Lebo Hamath;
6:13:6:all the inhabitants of the hill country from Lebanon to Misrephoth Maim, including all the Sidonians. I will drive them out before the Israelites; just allocate this land to Israel by lot, as I have commanded you.
6:13:7:Now then, divide this land among the nine tribes and the half-tribe of Manasseh."
6:13:8:With the other half-tribe, the Reubenites and the Gadites had already received their inheritance, which Moses had given them east of the Jordan, as follows:
6:13:9:from Aroer on the rim of the Arnon Gorge, and the town in the middle of the gorge, the whole plateau of Medeba as far as Dibon,
6:13:10:and all the towns of Sihon king of the Amorites, who ruled in Heshbon, up to the border of the Ammonites;
6:13:11:Gilead, and the territory of the Geshurites and Maacathites, all Mount Hermon, and all Bashan as far as Salekah—
6:13:12:the entire kingdom of Og in Bashan, who had reigned in Ashtaroth and Edrei and was one of the last of the Rephaites. Moses had defeated them and taken their land.
6:13:13:But the Israelites did not drive out the people of Geshur and Maacah; so they continue to live among the Israelites to this day.
6:13:14:To the tribe of Levi, however, Moses gave no inheritance; the offerings made by fire to the Lord, the God of Israel, are their inheritance, as he promised them.
6:13:15:This is what Moses had given to the tribe of Reuben, according to its clans:
6:13:16:The territory from Aroer on the rim of the Arnon Gorge, and the town in the middle of the gorge, and the whole plateau past Medeba,
6:13:17:Heshbon and all its towns on the plateau, including Dibon, Bamoth Baal, Beth Baal Meon,
6:13:18:Jahaz, Kedemoth, Mephaath,
6:13:19:Kiriathaim, Sibmah, Zereth Shahar on the hill in the valley,
6:13:20:Beth Peor, the slopes of Pisgah, and Beth Jeshimoth—
6:13:21:all the towns on the plateau and the entire realm of Sihon king of the Amorites, who ruled at Heshbon. Moses had defeated him and the Midianite chiefs, Evi, Rekem, Zur, Hur, and Reba—princes allied with Sihon—who lived in that country.
6:13:22:In addition to those slain in battle, the Israelites had put to the sword Balaam son of Beor, who practiced divination.
6:13:23:The boundary of the Reubenites was the bank of the Jordan. These towns and their villages were the inheritance of the Reubenites, according to their clans.
6:13:24:This is what Moses had given to the tribe of Gad, according to its clans:
6:13:25:The territory of Jazer, all the towns of Gilead, and half the Ammonite country as far as Aroer, near Rabbah;
6:13:26:from Heshbon to Ramath Mizpah and Betonim, and from Mahanaim to the territory of Debir;
6:13:27:in the valley, Beth Haram, Beth Nimrah, Succoth, and Zaphon with the rest of the realm of Sihon king of Heshbon (the east side of the Jordan, the territory up to the end of the Sea of Galilee).
6:13:28:These towns and their villages were the inheritance of the Gadites, according to their clans.
6:13:29:This is what Moses had given to the half-tribe of Manasseh, that is, to half the family of the descendants of Manasseh, according to its clans:
6:13:30:The territory extending from Mahanaim and including all of Bashan, the entire realm of Og king of Bashan—all the settlements of Jair in Bashan, sixty towns,
6:13:31:half of Gilead, and Ashtaroth and Edrei (the royal cities of Og in Bashan). This was for the descendants of Makir son of Manasseh—for half of the sons of Makir, according to their clans.
6:13:32:These are the territories Moses had distributed as an inheritance in the plains of Moab east of the Jordan, opposite Jericho.
6:13:33:But to the tribe of Levi, Moses had given no inheritance; the Lord, the God of Israel, is their inheritance, as he promised them.
6:14:1: At that time, the Israelites gathered together to distribute the land they had conquered. The tribes of Judah and Joseph approached Joshua.
6:14:2: Caleb, son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite, said to Joshua, "You know what the Lord said to Moses, the man of God, concerning you and me at Kadesh Barnea.
6:14:3: I was forty years old when Moses, the servant of the Lord, sent me from Kadesh Barnea to scout out the land. I brought back a truthful report to him.
6:14:4: But my fellow scouts who went with me discouraged the people, for they did not have faith in the promise of the land. 
6:14:5: That day, the Lord swore an oath, saying, 'Because you followed me wholeheartedly, the land where your feet have walked will be given to you and your descendants forever.'
6:14:6: Now, I am eighty-five years old, and I am still as strong today as I was when Moses sent me out.
6:14:7: My strength for battle and daily tasks has not diminished.
6:14:8: So, give me this hill country that the Lord promised me. You heard that the Anakim were there, living in great fortified cities. If the Lord is with me, I will drive them out, just as he said."
6:14:9: Joshua blessed Caleb and gave him Hebron as his inheritance.
6:14:10: Hebron has belonged to Caleb, son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite, ever since, because he followed the Lord, the God of Israel, wholeheartedly.
6:14:11: Hebron used to be called Kiriath Arba, named after Arba, the greatest man among the Anakim. And so, the land had rest from war.
6:15:1:The territory allotted to the tribe of Judah, according to their clans, extended from the border of Edom in the south to the wilderness of Zin.
6:15:2:It began at the southernmost point of the Dead Sea, 
6:15:3:continued eastward along the ascent of Akrabbim, passed through Zin, and ascended southward to Kadesh Barnea. From there it went to Hazar Addar and crossed over to Azmon.
6:15:4:Following Azmon, the border turned toward the Wadi of Egypt and ended at the Mediterranean Sea. This was their southern boundary.
6:15:5:The eastern boundary was the Dead Sea up to the mouth of the Jordan River. The northern boundary started from the bay of the sea at the mouth of the Jordan,
6:15:6:went up to Beth Hoglah, proceeded north of Beth Arabah, and continued up to the Stone of Bohan son of Reuben.
6:15:7:The boundary then went up to Debir from the Valley of Achor, turning north to Gilgal, which is opposite the Ascent of Adummim on the south side of the valley. It continued along to the waters of En Shemesh and came out at En Rogel.
6:15:8:Next, it went up the Valley of Ben Hinnom along the southern slope of the Jebusite city (that is, Jerusalem). From there, it climbed to the top of the hill west of the Hinnom Valley, at the northern end of the Valley of Rephaim.
6:15:9:The border then extended from the top of the hill to the spring of the Waters of Nephtoah, and went out to the towns of Mount Ephron. It then curved around to Baalah (that is, Kiriath Jearim).
6:15:10:From Baalah, the boundary went west to Mount Seir, passed along the northern slope of Mount Jearim (that is, Chesalon), descended to Beth Shemesh, and crossed over to Timnah.
6:15:11:It then went out to the slope of Ekron, turned toward Shikkeron, passed along to Mount Baalah, and reached Jabneel. The border ended at the sea.
6:15:12:The western boundary was the coastline of the Mediterranean Sea. These were the boundaries around the people of Judah by their clans.
6:15:13:In accordance with the Lord's command to Joshua, he gave Caleb son of Jephunneh a portion among the people of Judah—Kiriath Arba, that is, Hebron (Arba was the forefather of Anak).
6:15:14:Caleb drove out from there the three sons of Anak: Sheshai, Ahiman, and Talmai, descendants of Anak.
6:15:15:From there he advanced against the people living in Debir (formerly called Kiriath Sepher).
6:15:16:Caleb said, "I will give my daughter Acsah in marriage to the man who attacks and captures Kiriath Sepher."
6:15:17:Othniel son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother, took it; so Caleb gave his daughter Acsah to him in marriage.
6:15:18:When she arrived, she urged Othniel to ask her father for a field. As she got off her donkey, Caleb asked her, "What do you want?"
6:15:19:She replied, "Give me a blessing. Since you have given me land in the Negev, give me also springs of water." So Caleb gave her the upper and lower springs.
6:15:20:This was the inheritance of the tribe of Judah, according to their clans:
6:15:21:The southernmost cities of the tribe of Judah in the Negev toward the border of Edom were: Kabzeel, Eder, Jagur,
6:15:22:Kinah, Dimonah, Adadah,
6:15:23:Kedesh, Hazor, Ithnan,
6:15:24:Ziph, Telem, Bealoth,
6:15:25:Hazor Hadattah, Kerioth Hezron (that is, Hazor),
6:15:26:Amam, Shema, Moladah,
6:15:27:Hazar Gaddah, Heshmon, Beth Pelet,
6:15:28:Hazar Shual, Beersheba, Biziothiah,
6:15:29:Baalah, Iim, Ezem,
6:15:30:Eltolad, Chesil, Hormah,
6:15:31:Ziklag, Madmannah, Sansannah,
6:15:32:Lebaoth, Shilhim, Ain, and Rimmon—a total of twenty-nine towns and their villages.
6:15:33:In the western foothills were Eshtaol, Zorah, Ashnah,
6:15:34:Zanoah, En Gannim, Tappuah, Enam,
6:15:35:Jarmuth, Adullam, Socoh, Azekah,
6:15:36:Shaaraim, Adithaim, Gederah, and Gederothaim—fourteen towns and their villages.
6:15:37:Zenan, Hadashah, Migdal Gad,
6:15:38:Dilean, Mizpah, Joktheel,
6:15:39:Lachish, Bozkath, Eglon,
6:15:40:Cabbon, Lahmas, Chitlish,
6:15:41:Gederoth, Beth Dagon, Naamah, and Makkedah—sixteen towns and their villages.
6:15:42:Libnah, Ether, Ashan,
6:15:43:Iphtah, Ashnah, Nezib,
6:15:44:Keilah, Achzib, and Mareshah—nine towns and their villages.
6:15:45:Ekron, with its surrounding settlements and villages;
6:15:46:west of Ekron, all the towns and their villages near Ashdod, together with their villages;
6:15:47:Ashdod, its surrounding settlements and villages; and Gaza, its settlements and villages, as far as the Wadi of Egypt and the coastline of the Mediterranean Sea.
6:15:48:In the hill country were Shamir, Jattir, Socoh,
6:15:49:Dannah, Kiriath Sannah (that is, Debir),
6:15:50:Anab, Eshtemoh, Anim,
6:15:51:Goshen, Holon, and Giloh—eleven towns and their villages.
6:15:52:Arab, Dumah, Eshan,
6:15:53:Janim, Beth Tappuah, Aphekah,
6:15:54:Humtah, Kiriath Arba (that is, Hebron), and Zior—nine towns and their villages.
6:15:55:Maon, Carmel, Ziph, Juttah,
6:15:56:Jezreel, Jokdeam, Zanoah,
6:15:57:Kain, Gibeah, and Timnah—ten towns and their villages.
6:15:58:Halhul, Beth Zur, Gedor,
6:15:59:Maarath, Beth Anoth, and Eltekon—six towns and their villages.
6:15:60:Kiriath Baal (that is, Kiriath Jearim) and Rabbah—two towns and their villages.
6:15:61:In the wilderness were Beth Arabah, Middin, Secacah,
6:15:62:Nibshan, the City of Salt, and En Gedi—six towns and their villages.
6:15:63:But the people of Judah could not drive out the Jebusites, who lived in Jerusalem; so the Jebusites live there among the people of Judah to this day.
6:16:1:In this part, we learn about the land that was given to the descendants of Joseph, which included the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh.
6:16:2:The territory began at the Jordan River in the east, went up to Jericho, passed through the hill country westward, and ended at the wilderness of Beth-aven.
6:16:3:From there, the boundary went southward to Luz (that is, Bethel) and continued down to Ataroth-addar on the hill south of Lower Beth-horon.
6:16:4:Next, the border curved westward from Ataroth-addar to the area of Mount Jearim (also known as Kesalon), then turned to Shaphir.
6:16:5:It proceeded to the region of Beth-shemesh, crossed over to Timnah, and went out to the slopes of Ekron.
6:16:6:From there, the boundary curved northward to Shikkeron, passed along Mount Baalah, and extended toward Jabneel. The boundary concluded at the Mediterranean Sea.
6:16:7:The southern border of the tribe of Ephraim's territory and their inheritance was connected to this. 
6:16:8:Tappuah was on the border of Manasseh, but Tappuah itself belonged to the tribe of Ephraim, even though the villages surrounding it were assigned to Manasseh.
6:16:9:Moreover, the descendants of Ephraim received some towns within the territory of Manasseh, along with their surrounding villages.
6:16:10:However, they did not drive out the Canaanites who lived in Gezer; so the Canaanites continued to live among the Ephraimites to this day, but they became forced laborers.
6:17:1:The tribe of Manasseh, Joseph's firstborn, also received their land allotment. Machir, Manasseh's firstborn and father of Gilead, was a warrior, so he was given the lands of Gilead and Bashan.
6:17:2:Manasseh's other descendants were allotted additional territory according to their clans: the clans of Abiezer, Helek, Asriel, Shechem, Hepher, and Shemida; these were the male descendants of Manasseh, son of Joseph, by their clans.
6:17:3:Now Zelophehad, son of Hepher, son of Gilead, son of Machir, son of Manasseh, had no sons but only daughters. Their names were Mahlah, Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah.
6:17:4:They approached Eleazar the priest, Joshua son of Nun, and the leaders, saying, "The Lord commanded Moses to give us an inheritance among our relatives." So, according to the command of the Lord, they were given an inheritance among their father's brothers.
6:17:5:Ten portions fell to Manasseh, besides the land of Gilead and Bashan, which is on the other side of the Jordan,
6:17:6:because the daughters of Manasseh received an inheritance among his sons. The land of Gilead belonged to the rest of the descendants of Manasseh.
6:17:7:The border of Manasseh extended from Asher to Michmethath, east of Shechem. The boundary went southward from there to include the inhabitants of En Tappuah.
6:17:8:Manasseh also held Tappuah, but Tappuah itself, on the border of Manasseh, belonged to the descendants of Ephraim.
6:17:9:Next, the border descended to the Kanah Ravine. The cities south of the ravine belonged to Ephraim among the cities of Manasseh. The border of Manasseh was on the north side of the ravine and ended at the sea.
6:17:10:The southern territory was Ephraim's, and the northern territory was Manasseh's. They reached the sea and bordered Asher on the north and Issachar on the east.
6:17:11:In Issachar and Asher, Manasseh also had Beth Shean, Ibleam, Dor, Endor, Taanach, Megiddo, and their surrounding settlements, the three of Naphath.
6:17:12:Yet the descendants of Manasseh could not take possession of these towns; the Canaanites were determined to stay in that region.
6:17:13:When the Israelites grew stronger, they imposed forced labor on the Canaanites but did not drive them out completely.
6:17:14:The descendants of Joseph spoke to Joshua, saying, "Why have you given us only one allotment and one portion for an inheritance? We are a numerous people, and the Lord has blessed us abundantly."
6:17:15:Joshua replied, "If you are so numerous and need more land, go up to the forest and clear a place for yourselves there in the land of the Perizzites and Rephaim, since the hill country of Ephraim is too small for you."
6:17:16:The descendants of Joseph responded, "The hill country is not enough for us, and all the Canaanites who live in the plain have iron chariots, both those in Beth Shean and its settlements and those in the Valley of Jezreel."
6:17:17:Joshua then said to the house of Joseph, to both Ephraim and Manasseh, "You are indeed a numerous people with great power. You will not have just one allotment
6:17:18:but the hill country as well; though it is a forest, you shall clear it and possess it to its farthest borders. For you will drive out the Canaanites, even though they have iron chariots and are strong."
6:18:1:After the Israelites had set up the Tabernacle at Shiloh, they gathered together to divide the remaining land among the tribes.
6:18:2:Seven tribes of Israel still hadn't received their inheritance.
6:18:3:So Joshua said to them, "How long will you wait before taking possession of the land that the Lord, the God of your ancestors, has given you?
6:18:4:Appoint three representatives from each tribe, and I will send them out to explore the land. They'll create a map dividing it into seven parts.
6:18:5:Bring the map to me, and we'll cast lots here in Shiloh in the presence of the Lord. That's how we'll divide the land.
6:18:6:The Levites won't receive an allotment like the other tribes, since their inheritance is serving as priests for the Lord. Gad, Reuben, and half of Manasseh have already received their inheritance east of the Jordan River, which Moses, the servant of the Lord, gave them."
6:18:7:As instructed, the men went out to survey the land. They divided it into seven parts and wrote a description of each part in a book, then returned to Joshua at the camp in Shiloh.
6:18:8:Joshua cast lots for the tribes in Shiloh, in the presence of the Lord, to distribute the land among the remaining tribes of Israel.
6:18:9:The first lot fell to the tribe of Benjamin, according to their families. Their territory lay between Judah and Joseph.
6:18:10:Benjamin's northern border began at the Jordan River, went up to the slope of Jericho, then westward through the hill country and ended at the wilderness of Beth-aven.
6:18:11:The border continued southward from there to Luz (that is, Bethel), and then went down to Ataroth-addar on the hill south of Lower Beth-horon.
6:18:12:From this point, the border curved westward, ending at the mountain that overlooks the Valley of Ben-hinnom, which is at the northern end of the Valley of Rephaim. This formed the western border.
6:18:13:From there, the southern border extended in a straight line to the spring of En-rogel, then turned eastward to En-shemesh and proceeded to Geliloth, opposite the Ascent of Adummim.
6:18:14:The border then curved northward to the Stone of Bohan son of Reuben, passed through the Arabah valley, and continued to the northern slope of Beth-hoglah.
6:18:15:The border then ran along the northern edge of Beth-arabah, and finally, it ended at the Salt Sea, at the southern end of the Jordan River. These were the borders of Benjamin's territory.
6:18:16:The cities within Benjamin's territory included Jericho, Beth-hoglah, Emek-keziz,
6:18:17:Parah, Ophrah, Chephar-ammoni,
6:18:18:Ophni, and Geba—twelve cities, along with their villages.
6:18:19:Other cities were Gibeon, Ramah, Beeroth,
6:18:20:Mizpah, Chephirah, Mozah,
6:18:21:Rekem, Irpeel, Taralah,
6:18:22:Zela, Haeleph, Jebus (that is, Jerusalem), Gibeah, and Kiriath-jearim—fourteen cities, along with their villages. This was the inheritance of Benjamin's tribe, according to their families.
6:19:1:In the second allotment, Simeon's tribe received their inheritance within Judah's territory.
6:19:2:The following towns were assigned to them: Beersheba, Sheba, Moladah,
6:19:3:Hazar-shual, Balah, Ezem,
6:19:4:Eltolad, Bethul, Hormah,
6:19:5:Ziklag, Beth-marcaboth, Hazar-susah,
6:19:6:And Beth-lebaoth, and Sharuhen; thirteen cities in total, along with their surrounding villages.
6:19:7:Ain, Rimmon, Ether, and Ashan were also included, making four more cities and their villages.
6:19:8:All these towns and villages belonged to the tribe of Simeon, within the territory of the tribe of Judah.
6:19:9:Simeon's inheritance was taken from Judah's portion because Judah's territory was too large for them. Therefore, Simeon inherited land within Judah's borders.
6:19:10:Next, Zebulun's tribe received their inheritance. Their border extended to Sarid,
6:19:11:and went up westward toward Maralah, reaching Dabbasheth and the valley near Jokneam.
6:19:12:From Sarid, it turned eastward toward the sunrise, going to the border of Chisloth-tabor, then to Daberath, and up to Japhia.
6:19:13:Continuing east, it went to Gath-hepher, Eth-kazin, and Rimmon, curving toward Neah.
6:19:14:The northern border turned toward Hannathon, ending at the Valley of Iphtahel.
6:19:15:Zebulun's territory also included the towns of Kattath, Nahalal, Shimron, Idalah, and Bethlehem; a total of twelve cities with their villages.
6:19:16:This was the inheritance of the tribe of Zebulun, according to their families, including these cities and their villages.
6:19:17:The fourth lot fell to Issachar's tribe, for their families.
6:19:18:Their territory included Jezreel, Chesulloth, Shunem,
6:19:19:Hapharaim, Shion, Anaharath,
6:19:20:Rabbith, Kishion, Ebez,
6:19:21:Remeth, En-gannim, En-haddah, and Beth-pazzez.
6:19:22:The border touched Tabor, Shahazumah, and Beth-shemesh, ending at the Jordan River. This included sixteen cities and their villages.
6:19:23:This was the inheritance of the tribe of Issachar, according to their families, including the cities and their villages.
6:19:24:The fifth lot was assigned to Asher's tribe, for their families.
6:19:25:Their territory included Helkath, Hali, Beten, Achshaph,
6:19:26:Allammelech, Amad, and Misheal, reaching Carmel westward and Shihor-libnath.
6:19:27:Turning eastward toward the sunrise, it went to Beth-dagon, touching Zebulun and the Valley of Iphtahel, then northward to Beth-emek and Neiel, passing Cabul on the left.
6:19:28:It encompassed Ebron, Rehob, Hammon, and Kanah, extending as far as Greater Sidon.
6:19:29:The border then turned toward Ramah, reaching the fortified city of Tyre. It turned to Hosah and ended at the sea, including Mahalab, Achzib,
6:19:30:Ummah, Aphek, and Rehob; a total of twenty-two cities with their villages.
6:19:31:This was the inheritance of the tribe of Asher, according to their families, including these cities and their villages.
6:19:32:For Naphtali's tribe, the sixth lot was assigned, for their families.
6:19:33:Their border started at Heleph, from the oak in Zaanannim, passing Adami-nekeb and Jabneel, as far as Lakkum, and ending at the Jordan River.
6:19:34:Westward, it went through Aznoth-tabor and extended from there to Hukkok, touching Zebulun on the south, Asher on the west, and Judah at the Jordan River on the east.
6:19:35:The fortified cities included Ziddim, Zer, Hammath, Rakkath, Chinnereth,
6:19:36:Adamah, Ramah, Hazor,
6:19:37:Kedesh, Edrei, En-hazor,
6:19:38:Yiron, Migdal-el, Horem, Beth-anath, and Beth-shemesh; a total of nineteen cities with their villages.
6:19:39:This was the inheritance of the tribe of Naphtali, according to their families, including these cities and their villages.
6:19:40:The seventh lot fell to Dan's tribe, for their families.
6:19:41:Their territory included Zorah, Eshtaol, Ir-shemesh,
6:19:42:Shaalabbin, Aijalon, Ithlah,
6:19:43:Elon, Timnah, Ekron,
6:19:44:Eltekeh, Gibbethon, Baalath,
6:19:45:Jehud, Bene-berak, Gath-rimmon,
6:19:46:Me-jarkon, Rakkon, and the area near Joppa.
6:19:47:However, the Danites had trouble taking possession of their territory, so they fought against Leshem and captured it. They struck it down with the sword, took possession of it, and settled there. They renamed Leshem as Dan, after their ancestor.
6:19:48:This was the inheritance of the tribe of Dan, according to their families, including these cities and their villages.
6:19:49:After allocating the land as an inheritance for each tribe, the Israelites gave Joshua son of Nun his own portion.
6:19:50:As the Lord had instructed, they gave him the city he requested: Timnath-serah in the hill country of Ephraim. He rebuilt the city and settled there.
6:19:51:These were the inheritances that Eleazar the priest, Joshua son of Nun, and the heads of the families of the tribes of Israel distributed by lot at Shiloh before the Lord, at the entrance of the Tent of Meeting. So they finished dividing the land.
6:20:1:In the Lord's instructions, Joshua was told to ask the Israelites to choose cities of refuge.
6:20:2:These cities would serve as a safe haven for anyone who accidentally killed another person, so they could escape the avenger of blood.
6:20:3:When the accused fled to one of these cities, they would be able to stand trial before the local assembly and not be killed without due process.
6:20:4:In accordance with this command, they designated the following cities:
6:20:5:Kedesh in Galilee, situated in the hill country of Naphtali; Shechem in the hill country of Ephraim; and Kiriath-arba (also known as Hebron) in the hill country of Judah.
6:20:6:On the east side of the Jordan River, they selected Bezer in the wilderness on the plateau, which belonged to the tribe of Reuben; Ramoth in Gilead, belonging to the tribe of Gad; and Golan in Bashan, part of the tribe of Manasseh.
6:20:7:These were the cities chosen by the Israelites to be the cities of refuge, where anyone who unintentionally killed someone could flee for safety. They would be protected from the avenger of blood until they stood trial before the assembly.
6:21:1:In this chapter, the family heads of the Levites approached Eleazar the priest, Joshua son of Nun, and the leaders of the other tribes of Israel.
6:21:2:They reminded them that the Lord had commanded through Moses to give the Levites cities to live in, along with their surrounding pasturelands.
6:21:3:So, by drawing lots, the Israelites gave these cities and their pasturelands to the Levites, as the Lord had instructed.
6:21:4:The first lot went to the Kohathite clans of the Levites who were descendants of Aaron the priest. They received thirteen cities from the tribes of Judah, Simeon, and Benjamin.
6:21:5:The rest of the Kohathites received ten cities from the clans of the tribes of Ephraim, Dan, and half of Manasseh.
6:21:6:The Gershonites were given thirteen cities from the clans of the tribes of Issachar, Asher, Naphtali, and half of Manasseh in Bashan.
6:21:7:Lastly, the Merarites received twelve cities from the tribes of Reuben, Gad, and Zebulun.
6:21:8:These cities and their pasturelands were assigned to the Levites by lot, as the Lord had commanded through Moses.
6:21:9:From the tribes of Judah and Simeon, they gave the following cities to the descendants of Aaron, who belonged to the Kohathite clans of the Levites:
6:21:10:Hebron (a city of refuge for those who accidentally killed someone), Libnah,
6:21:11:Jattir, Eshtemoa,
6:21:12:Holon, Debir,
6:21:13:Ain, Juttah,
6:21:14:and Beth-shemesh, along with their pasturelands—nine cities from these two tribes.
6:21:15:From the tribe of Benjamin, they gave them Gibeon, Geba,
6:21:16:Anathoth (another city of refuge), and Almon, along with their pasturelands—four cities in total.
6:21:17:Thus, the total number of cities given to the priestly descendants of Aaron was thirteen, along with their pasturelands.
6:21:18:The remaining Kohathite clans of the Levites received cities from the tribe of Ephraim:
6:21:19:Shechem (a city of refuge) in the hill country of Ephraim, Gezer,
6:21:20:Kibzaim, and Beth-horon, along with their pasturelands—four cities.
6:21:21:From the tribe of Dan, they received Eltekeh, Gibbethon,
6:21:22:Aijalon, and Gath-rimmon, along with their pasturelands—four cities.
6:21:23:From half of the tribe of Manasseh, they received Taanach and Gath-rimmon, along with their pasturelands—two cities.
6:21:24:In total, the other Kohathite clans received ten cities and their surrounding pasturelands.
6:21:25:For the Gershonite clans of the Levites, they received from the half-tribe of Manasseh: Golan in Bashan (a city of refuge) and Beeshterah, along with their pasturelands—two cities.
6:21:26:From the tribe of Issachar, they received Kishion, Daberath,
6:21:27:Jarmuth, and En-gannim, along with their pasturelands—four cities.
6:21:28:From the tribe of Asher, they received Mishal, Abdon,
6:21:29:Hukok, and Rehob, along with their pasturelands—four cities.
6:21:30:From the tribe of Naphtali, they received Kedesh in Galilee (a city of refuge), Hammoth-dor, and Kartan, along with their pasturelands—three cities.
6:21:31:In total, the Gershonite clans received thirteen cities and their surrounding pasturelands.
6:21:32:For the Merarite clans, the remaining Levites, they received from the tribe of Zebulun: Jokneam, Kartah,
6:21:33:Dimnah, and Nahalal, along with their pasturelands—four cities.
6:21:34:From the tribe of Reuben, they received Bezer, Jahaz,
6:21:35:Kedemoth, and Mephaath, along with their pasturelands
6:21:36:—four cities. From the tribe of Gad, they received Ramoth in Gilead (a city of refuge), Mahanaim,
6:21:37:Heshbon, and Jazer, along with their pasturelands—four cities.
6:21:38:In total, the Merarite clans received twelve cities and their surrounding pasturelands.
6:21:39:So, all the Levites received forty-eight cities, along with their pasturelands, within the territories of the other Israelite tribes.
6:21:40:These cities were distributed among the tribes of Israel by lot, as the Lord had commanded through Moses.
6:22:1: After the Israelites had conquered the land, Joshua called together the tribes of Reuben, Gad, and the half-tribe of Manasseh.
6:22:2: He told them, "You've done everything that Moses, the servant of the Lord, commanded you, and you've obeyed me in all I've asked.
6:22:3: For a long time now, you've been loyal to your fellow Israelites, following the Lord's command. Today, the Lord has given rest to your brothers, just as He promised.
6:22:4: Now that the Lord has granted peace to your fellow Israelites, it's time for you to return to your own land on the east side of the Jordan River, which Moses assigned to you.
6:22:5: But remember to keep the commandments and teachings of the Lord your God, to love Him, walk in His ways, obey His commands, hold fast to Him, and serve Him with all your heart and soul."
6:22:6: Then Joshua blessed them and sent them away, and they returned to their homes.
6:22:7: To the half-tribe of Manasseh, Moses had given land in Bashan, while Joshua gave land west of the Jordan River to the other half of the tribe. When Joshua sent them to their homes, he also blessed them,
6:22:8: saying, "Return home with your great wealth—large herds of livestock, silver, gold, bronze, iron, and plenty of clothing. Divide the spoils of your enemies among your relatives."
6:22:9: So the Reubenites, Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh left the Israelites at Shiloh in Canaan and returned to Gilead, their own land, as Moses had assigned to them.
6:22:10: When they arrived at the region of the Jordan River in the land of Canaan, they built a large, impressive altar there by the river.
6:22:11: The Israelites heard that the tribes on the east side of the Jordan had built an altar, and the whole assembly gathered at Shiloh to wage war against them.
6:22:12: Before going to battle, the Israelites sent Phinehas, son of Eleazar the priest, and ten tribal leaders to speak with the eastern tribes.
6:22:13: They asked, "Why have you rebelled against the God of Israel by building this altar? You're turning away from the Lord!"
6:22:14: They reminded them of the sin at Peor, which brought a plague upon the Israelites, and how they still hadn't purified themselves from it.
6:22:15: "If your land is unclean, come over to the Lord's land where His tabernacle stands. But don't rebel against the Lord or against us by building an altar for yourselves apart from the Lord's altar."
6:22:16: The eastern tribes replied, "The Mighty One, God, the Lord! He knows, and let Israel know! If we have acted in rebellion or unfaithfulness, do not spare us today.
6:22:17: We built this altar not for burnt offerings or sacrifices, but as a witness between us and you, and between our descendants and yours, that we serve the Lord.
6:22:18: So in the future, if you accuse us of not worshiping the Lord, we can point to this altar and say, 'This is our witness that we serve the Lord.'
6:22:19: We didn't want you to think we had turned away from the Lord and built an altar for burnt offerings, grain offerings, or sacrifices. We wanted it to be a witness between us."
6:22:20: Phinehas and the leaders were satisfied with their explanation, and they said, "Now we know that the Lord is with us because you haven't acted unfaithfully toward Him. This has saved us from His hand."
6:22:21: The Israelites were pleased with the outcome, and they praised God. They no longer talked about going to war against the eastern tribes or destroying their land.
6:22:22: That day, they called the altar "Witness," saying, "It's a witness between us that the Lord is our God."
6:22:23: So the eastern tribes returned to Gilead, and peace was restored among the Israelites.
6:23:1:In the time that had passed since the Lord had given Israel rest from their enemies, Joshua, now old and advanced in years,
6:23:2:called for all of Israel's leaders, elders, judges, and officers, and said to them, "I have grown old, and my years are many.
6:23:3:You have seen everything the Lord your God has done to these nations on your behalf, for it is the Lord your God who has fought for you.
6:23:4:Look, I have allotted to you these remaining nations as an inheritance for your tribes, from the Jordan River to the Great Sea in the west.
6:23:5:The Lord your God will drive them out before you and remove them from your sight, so that you may possess their land, as He promised you.
6:23:6:Be very strong and always obey all that is written in the Book of the Law of Moses, without turning aside to the right or to the left.
6:23:7:Do not associate with these nations that remain among you; do not invoke their gods or swear by them, nor serve or bow down to them.
6:23:8:But hold fast to the Lord your God, just as you have done up to this day.
6:23:9:For the Lord has driven out great and powerful nations before you, and no one has been able to stand against you to this day.
6:23:10:One of you can chase a thousand, because it is the Lord your God who fights for you, just as He promised.
6:23:11:So be very careful to love the Lord your God.
6:23:12:But if you turn away and ally yourselves with the survivors of these nations that remain among you, and if you intermarry and associate with them,
6:23:13:then know for certain that the Lord your God will no longer drive out these nations before you. Instead, they will become snares and traps for you, whips on your backs and thorns in your eyes, until you perish from this good land that the Lord your God has given you.
6:23:14:Now I am about to go the way of all the earth, and you know with all your heart and soul that not one of the good promises the Lord your God gave you has failed. Every promise has been fulfilled; not one has failed.
6:23:15:But just as every good promise of the Lord your God has come true, so the Lord will bring on you all the evil He has threatened, until He has destroyed you from this good land He has given you.
6:23:16:If you violate the covenant of the Lord your God, which He commanded you, and go and serve other gods and bow down to them, then the Lord's anger will burn against you, and you will quickly perish from the good land He has given you.
6:24:1:Long ago, Joshua gathered all the tribes of Israel at Shechem. He summoned their elders, leaders, judges, and officers, and they presented themselves before God.
6:24:2:Joshua said to all the people, "This is what the Lord, the God of Israel, says: 'Your ancestors, including Terah, the father of Abraham and Nahor, lived beyond the Euphrates River and worshiped other gods.
6:24:3:But I took your ancestor Abraham from that land, led him throughout Canaan, and multiplied his descendants. I gave him Isaac,
6:24:4:and to Isaac I gave Jacob and Esau. I assigned Mount Seir to Esau, but Jacob and his children went down to Egypt.
6:24:5:Later, I sent Moses and Aaron, and I plagued Egypt with what I did among them. Afterward, I brought you out.
6:24:6:I brought your ancestors out of Egypt, and you came to the sea. The Egyptians pursued your ancestors with chariots and horsemen to the Red Sea.
6:24:7:When they cried out to the Lord, He put darkness between you and the Egyptians; He brought the sea upon them and covered them. Your own eyes saw what I did in Egypt. Then you lived in the wilderness for a long time.
6:24:8:I brought you to the land of the Amorites who lived east of the Jordan. They fought against you, but I gave them into your hands. You took possession of their land, and I destroyed them before you.
6:24:9:Then Balak son of Zippor, king of Moab, waged war against Israel and summoned Balaam son of Beor to curse you.
6:24:10:However, I refused to listen to Balaam, so he blessed you instead. I delivered you from his hand.
6:24:11:You crossed the Jordan and came to Jericho. The citizens of Jericho fought against you, as did the Amorites, Perizzites, Canaanites, Hittites, Girgashites, Hivites, and Jebusites, but I gave them into your hands.
6:24:12:I sent hornets ahead of you, which drove out the two kings of the Amorites before you. It was not by your sword or bow.
6:24:13:I gave you a land you did not labor for, cities you did not build, and you live in them; you eat from vineyards and olive groves that you did not plant.'
6:24:14:Now fear the Lord and serve Him with all faithfulness. Remove the gods your ancestors worshiped beyond the Euphrates River and in Egypt, and serve the Lord.
6:24:15:But if serving the Lord seems undesirable to you, choose today whom you will serve, whether the gods your ancestors served beyond the Euphrates, or the gods of the Amorites, in whose land you are living. As for me and my household, we will serve the Lord."
6:24:16:The people answered, "Far be it from us to forsake the Lord to serve other gods!
6:24:17:It was the Lord our God who brought us and our ancestors up from Egypt, from the land of slavery, and performed those great signs before our eyes. He protected us on our entire journey and among all the nations through which we traveled.
6:24:18:And the Lord drove out before us all the nations, including the Amorites who lived in the land. We too will serve the Lord, because He is our God."
6:24:19:Joshua said to the people, "You are not able to serve the Lord. He is a holy God; He is a jealous God. He will not forgive your rebellion and your sins.
6:24:20:If you forsake the Lord and serve foreign gods, He will turn and bring disaster on you and make an end of you, after He has been good to you."
6:24:21:But the people said to Joshua, "No! We will serve the Lord."
6:24:22:Then Joshua said, "You are witnesses against yourselves that you have chosen to serve the Lord."Yes, we are witnesses," they replied.
6:24:23:"Now then," said Joshua, "throw away the foreign gods among you and yield your hearts to the Lord, the God of Israel."
6:24:24:The people said to Joshua, "We will serve the Lord our God and obey His voice."
6:24:25:On that day Joshua made a covenant for the people, and there at Shechem he reaffirmed for them their commitment to the law.
6:24:26:Joshua recorded these things in the Book of the Law of God. Then he took a large stone and set it up there under the oak near the holy place of the Lord.
6:24:27:He said to all the people, "See, this stone will be a witness against us. It has heard all the words the Lord has spoken to us. It will be a witness against you if you are untrue to your God."
6:24:28:Then Joshua dismissed the people, each to their own inheritance.
6:24:29:After these events, Joshua son of Nun, the servant of the Lord, died at the age of 110.
6:24:30:They buried him in the land of his inheritance, at Timnath Serah in the hill country of Ephraim, north of Mount Gaash.
6:24:31:Israel served the Lord throughout the lifetime of Joshua and of the elders who outlived him and who had experienced everything the Lord had done for Israel.
6:24:32:Joseph's bones, which the Israelites had brought up from Egypt, were buried at Shechem in the tract of land that Jacob bought for a hundred pieces of silver from the sons of Hamor, the father of Shechem. This became the inheritance of Joseph's descendants.
6:24:33:Eleazar son of Aaron also died and was buried at Gibeah, which had been allotted to his son Phinehas in the hill country of Ephraim.