8:1:1:In the days when judges ruled, there was a famine in the land. A man from Bethlehem in Judah went with his wife and two sons to live in the territory of Moab for a while.
8:1:2:The man's name was Elimelech, his wife's name was Naomi, and their two sons were named Mahlon and Chilion. They were Ephrathites from Bethlehem in Judah. They arrived in Moab and settled there.
8:1:3:Eventually, Elimelech, Naomi's husband, died, leaving her with her two sons.
8:1:4:Her sons married Moabite women—one named Orpah, and the other Ruth. They lived there for about ten years.
8:1:5:Then both Mahlon and Chilion also passed away, and Naomi was left without her husband and her two sons.
8:1:6:When Naomi heard that the Lord had provided food for his people in Judah, she decided to return home with her daughters-in-law.
8:1:7:So they left the place where they were living and set out on the road back to Judah.
8:1:8:Naomi said to her daughters-in-law, "Go back, each of you, to your mother's home. May the Lord show kindness to you, as you have shown to your dead husbands and to me.
8:1:9:May the Lord grant you rest and happiness in the homes of your new husbands." Then she kissed them goodbye, and they wept aloud.
8:1:10:They replied, "No, we want to go with you to your people."
8:1:11:But Naomi insisted, "Return home, my daughters. Why would you come with me? Am I able to have more sons who could become your husbands?
8:1:12:Go back, my daughters, because I am too old to have another husband. Even if I thought there was still hope for me and got married tonight, and had sons,
8:1:13:would you wait until they grew up? Would you remain unmarried just for them? No, my daughters, it's more bitter for me than for you, because the Lord's hand has turned against me."
8:1:14:They wept again, and Orpah kissed her mother-in-law goodbye, but Ruth clung to her.
8:1:15:Naomi said, "Look, your sister-in-law is going back to her people and her gods. Follow her."
8:1:16:But Ruth replied, "Don't urge me to leave you or to turn back from you. Where you go, I will go; where you stay, I will stay. Your people will be my people, and your God will be my God.
8:1:17:Where you die, I will die, and there I will be buried. May the Lord deal with me, be it ever so severely, if anything but death separates you and me."
8:1:18:When Naomi saw that Ruth was determined to go with her, she stopped urging her.
8:1:19:So the two of them continued on their journey until they arrived in Bethlehem. When they entered the town, the whole community was stirred, and the women exclaimed, "Can this be Naomi?"
8:1:20:"Don't call me Naomi," she told them. "Call me Mara, because the Almighty has made my life very bitter.
8:1:21:I went away full, but the Lord has brought me back empty. Why do you call me Naomi? The Lord has afflicted me; the Almighty has brought misfortune upon me."
8:1:22:Naomi returned from Moab with her daughter-in-law Ruth the Moabitess, and they settled in Bethlehem as the barley harvest was beginning.
8:2:1:Now Naomi had a relative on her husband's side, a prominent man named Boaz, from the family of Elimelech.
8:2:2:One day, Ruth the Moabite said to Naomi, "Let me go to the fields and gather leftover grain behind anyone who will allow me." Naomi replied, "Go ahead, my daughter."
8:2:3:So she went out, entered a field, and began to glean behind the harvesters. As it turned out, she found herself working in a field belonging to Boaz, who was from the family of Elimelech.
8:2:4:Just then, Boaz arrived from Bethlehem and greeted the harvesters, "The Lord be with you!" They responded, "The Lord bless you!"
8:2:5:Boaz asked the overseer of his workers, "Whose young woman is that?"
8:2:6:The overseer replied, "She is the Moabite who came back with Naomi from the country of Moab.
8:2:7:She asked if she could glean and gather among the sheaves behind the harvesters. She has been hard at work since she arrived this morning and has hardly rested."
8:2:8:Boaz approached Ruth and said, "Listen carefully, my daughter. Don't go to glean in another field or leave this one. Stay here with my female workers.
8:2:9:Keep your eyes on the field they are harvesting, and follow them. I have told the men not to touch you. When you're thirsty, go to the water jars and drink from what the servants have drawn."
8:2:10:Ruth bowed down with her face to the ground and asked him, "Why have I found favor in your eyes that you should take notice of me, a foreigner?"
8:2:11:Boaz answered, "I've been told about everything you've done for your mother-in-law since the death of your husband—how you left your father and mother and your homeland and came to live with a people you did not know before.
8:2:12:May the Lord repay you for what you have done. May you be richly rewarded by the Lord, the God of Israel, under whose wings you have come to take refuge."
8:2:13:Ruth said, "Thank you, sir, for your kindness. You have comforted me and spoken kindly to me, even though I am not one of your servants."
8:2:14:At mealtime, Boaz said to her, "Come over here. Have some bread and dip it in the wine vinegar." When she sat down with the harvesters, he offered her some roasted grain. She ate all she wanted and had some left over.
8:2:15:As she got up to glean, Boaz gave orders to his men, "Let her gather among the sheaves and don't reprimand her.
8:2:16:Even pull out some stalks for her from the bundles and leave them for her to pick up, and don't rebuke her."
8:2:17:So Ruth gleaned in the field until evening. Then she threshed the barley she had gathered, and it amounted to about an ephah.
8:2:18:She carried it back to town, and her mother-in-law saw how much she had gathered. Ruth also brought out and gave her what she had left over after she had eaten enough.
8:2:19:Naomi asked her, "Where did you glean today? Where did you work? Blessed be the man who took notice of you!" Ruth told her mother-in-law about the one at whose place she had been working. She said, "The name of the man I worked with today is Boaz."
8:2:20:Naomi said to her daughter-in-law, "May he be blessed by the Lord, who has not stopped showing his kindness to the living and the dead." Naomi added, "That man is our close relative; he is one of our guardian-redeemers."
8:2:21:Ruth the Moabite said, "He even said to me, 'Stay with my workers until they finish harvesting all my grain.'"
8:2:22:Naomi said to Ruth her daughter-in-law, "It is good, my daughter, that you go out with his female workers because in someone else's field you might be harmed."
8:2:23:So Ruth stayed close to the female workers of Boaz to glean until the barley and wheat harvests were finished. And she lived with her mother-in-law.
8:3:1:One day, Naomi, Ruth's mother-in-law, said to her, "My daughter, shouldn't I help you find a home where you'll be comfortable and secure?
8:3:2:Boaz is a close relative of ours, and he's been kind to you. He's working at the barley threshing floor tonight.
8:3:3:So here's what you should do: take a bath, put on some perfume, and dress in your nicest clothes. Then go to the threshing floor, but don't let Boaz see you until he has finished eating and drinking.
8:3:4:When he lies down to sleep, notice where he's resting. Then go over, uncover his feet, and lie down there. He'll tell you what to do next."
8:3:5:Ruth replied, "I'll do everything you've told me."
8:3:6:So she went to the threshing floor and did exactly what her mother-in-law instructed.
8:3:7:After Boaz had eaten and drunk, feeling content, he went to lie down near the grain pile. Ruth quietly approached, uncovered his feet, and lay down.
8:3:8:In the middle of the night, Boaz was startled and turned over to find a woman lying at his feet.
8:3:9:He asked, "Who are you?" She answered, "I am Ruth, your servant. Please spread the corner of your garment over me, for you are a family redeemer."
8:3:10:Boaz responded, "May the Lord bless you, my daughter. Your latest act of kindness is even greater than the first, because you haven't pursued younger men, whether rich or poor.
8:3:11:Now, don't worry, my daughter. I'll do everything you've asked, because everyone in town knows that you are a virtuous woman.
8:3:12:It's true that I am a family redeemer, but there's another man who is a closer relative than I am.
8:3:13:Stay here tonight, and in the morning, if he agrees to redeem you, then let him do it. But if he doesn't want to, I swear by the Lord that I will redeem you myself. Now, lie down until morning."
8:3:14:So Ruth lay at his feet until morning but got up before anyone could recognize her. Boaz said, "No one must know that a woman came to the threshing floor."
8:3:15:Then he told her, "Bring the shawl you're wearing and hold it out." She did as he said, and he poured six measures of barley into it. Then he helped her put it on her back and sent her back to the city.
8:3:16:When Ruth returned to her mother-in-law, Naomi asked, "How did it go, my daughter?" Ruth told her everything Boaz had done for her.
8:3:17:She added, "He gave me these six measures of barley, saying, 'Don't go back to your mother-in-law empty-handed.'"
8:3:18:Naomi replied, "Wait, my daughter, until we find out what happens. Boaz won't rest until he has settled this matter today."
8:4:1:Now, Boaz went up to the town gate and took his seat there. Soon, the close relative he had mentioned came by, so Boaz said, "Hey, friend, come over here and sit down." The man came and sat down.
8:4:2:Boaz gathered ten of the city's elders and asked them to sit as well. Once they were seated, he addressed the close relative, saying, "Naomi has returned from Moab and is selling a piece of land that belonged to our brother Elimelech.
8:4:3:I thought I should inform you about it and suggest that you buy it in the presence of these sitting here and in the presence of the elders of my people. If you want to redeem it, do so. But if you don't want to, let me know, because there's no one else who has the right to redeem it except you, and I'm next in line." The man replied, "I will redeem it."
8:4:4:Then Boaz said, "On the day you buy the land from Naomi, you'll also acquire Ruth the Moabite, the widow of the deceased, in order to maintain the name of the dead with his property."
8:4:5:The close relative responded, "In that case, I can't redeem it, because I might jeopardize my own inheritance. You take my right of redemption, for I cannot do it."
8:4:6:In those days, it was customary in Israel for anyone transferring a right of purchase to remove his sandal and give it to the other party. This publicly validated the transaction.
8:4:7:So when the close relative said to Boaz, "Buy it yourself," he took off his sandal.
8:4:8:Boaz then announced to the elders and all the people, "You are witnesses today that I have bought from Naomi all the property of Elimelech, Mahlon, and Chilion.
8:4:9:I've also acquired Ruth the Moabite, Mahlon's widow, as my wife, to maintain the name of the deceased with his property, so that his name will not disappear from among his family or from his hometown. Today you are witnesses."
8:4:10:The elders and all the people at the gate said, "We are witnesses. May the LORD make the woman entering your house like Rachel and Leah, who together built up the house of Israel. May you be prosperous in Ephrathah and famous in Bethlehem.
8:4:11:Through the offspring the LORD gives you by this young woman, may your family be like that of Perez, whom Tamar bore to Judah."
8:4:12:Boaz married Ruth, and she became his wife. When he slept with her, the LORD enabled her to conceive, and she gave birth to a son.
8:4:13:The women said to Naomi, "Praise the LORD, who has not left you without a family redeemer today. May his name become well-known in Israel!
8:4:14:He will renew your life and sustain you in your old age. Your daughter-in-law, who loves you and is better to you than seven sons, has given him birth."
8:4:15:Naomi took the child, placed him on her lap, and cared for him.
8:4:16:The women living there said, "Naomi has a son!" They named him Obed. He became the father of Jesse, the father of David.
8:4:17:This is the genealogy of Perez: Perez was the father of Hezron,
8:4:18:Hezron the father of Ram, Ram the father of Amminadab,
8:4:19:Amminadab the father of Nahshon, Nahshon the father of Salmon,
8:4:20:Salmon the father of Boaz, Boaz the father of Obed,
8:4:21:Obed the father of Jesse, and Jesse the father of David.