39:1:1:The word of the LORD to Israel through Malachi:
39:1:2:"I have loved you," says the LORD. "Yet you ask, 'How have you shown your love for us?' Wasn't Esau Jacob's brother?" declares the LORD. "But I have loved Jacob,
39:1:3:and rejected Esau; I turned his mountains into a wasteland and left his inheritance to the desert jackals."
39:1:4:Though Edom may say, "We've been crushed, but we'll rebuild the ruins," the LORD of hosts replies, "They may build, but I will tear down. They'll be called the Wicked Land, the people with whom the LORD is always angry.
39:1:5:You will see it with your own eyes and say, 'Great is the LORD—even beyond the borders of Israel!'"
39:1:6:A son honors his father, and a servant his master. If I am a father, where is the honor due me? If I am a master, where is the respect due me?" says the LORD of hosts to you priests who despise my name. "But you ask, 'How have we despised your name?'
39:1:7:By offering polluted food on my altar! And you ask, 'How have we polluted you?' By saying that the LORD's table is contemptible.
39:1:8:When you offer blind animals for sacrifice, isn't that wrong? When you offer lame or sick animals, isn't that wrong? Present that to your governor! Will he be pleased with you or show you favor?" asks the LORD of hosts.
39:1:9:"Now plead with God to be gracious to us. With such offerings from your hands, will he accept you?" says the LORD of hosts.
39:1:10:"Oh, that one of you would shut the temple doors, so that you would not kindle fire on my altar in vain! I take no pleasure in you," says the LORD of hosts, "and I will not accept an offering from your hands.
39:1:11:For from the rising of the sun to its setting, my name will be great among the nations. In every place, incense and pure offerings will be brought to my name, because my name will be great among the nations," says the LORD of hosts.
39:1:12:"But you profane it by saying, 'The Lord's table is polluted, and the fruit, its food, is contemptible.'
39:1:13:You also say, 'What a burden!' and sniff at it contemptuously," says the LORD of hosts. "When you bring injured, lame, or sick animals, should I accept this from your hands?" asks the LORD.
39:1:14:"Cursed is the cheat who has an acceptable male in his flock and vows to give it, but then sacrifices a blemished animal to the Lord. For I am a great King," says the LORD of hosts, "and my name is to be feared among the nations."
39:2:1:Now, this command is for you, O priests:
39:2:2:If you don't listen and take it to heart to give glory to my name, says the LORD of hosts, I will send a curse upon you, and I will curse your blessings. Indeed, I have already cursed them because you are not taking it to heart.
39:2:3:Look, I will rebuke your descendants and spread dung on your faces, the dung of your festivals, and you will be taken away with it.
39:2:4:Then you will know that I have sent this command to you so that my covenant with Levi may continue, says the LORD of hosts.
39:2:5:My covenant with him was one of life and peace, which I gave to him as an object of reverence; so he revered me and stood in awe of my name.
39:2:6:True instruction was in his mouth, and no falsehood was found on his lips. He walked with me in peace and uprightness, and turned many from iniquity.
39:2:7:For the lips of a priest should guard knowledge, and people should seek instruction from his mouth, for he is the messenger of the LORD of hosts.
39:2:8:But you have turned aside from the way; you have caused many to stumble by your instruction; you have corrupted the covenant of Levi, says the LORD of hosts.
39:2:9:So I, in turn, have made you despised and humiliated before all the people, because you are not keeping my ways but showing partiality in your instruction.
39:2:10:Don't we all have one Father? Hasn't one God created us? Why do we betray one another, profaning the covenant of our ancestors?
39:2:11:Judah has been unfaithful, and a detestable thing has been done in Israel and in Jerusalem. For Judah has profaned the sanctuary of the LORD, which he loves, and has married the daughter of a foreign god.
39:2:12:May the LORD cut off from the tents of Jacob anyone who does this, any witness or participant, even if they bring offerings to the LORD of hosts.
39:2:13:And this you do as well: you cover the altar of the LORD with tears, with weeping and groaning because he no longer regards the offering or accepts it with favor from your hand.
39:2:14:But you ask, "Why?" Because the LORD has been a witness between you and the wife of your youth, to whom you have been faithless, though she is your companion and your wife by covenant.
39:2:15:Did he not make them one, with a portion of the Spirit in their union? And what was the one God seeking? Godly offspring. So guard yourselves in your spirit, and let none of you be faithless to the wife of your youth.
39:2:16:For I hate divorce, says the LORD, the God of Israel, and covering one's garment with violence, says the LORD of hosts. So take heed to your spirit, and do not be faithless.
39:2:17:You have wearied the LORD with your words. Yet you say, "How have we wearied him?" By saying, "All who do evil are good in the sight of the LORD, and he delights in them," or by asking, "Where is the God of justice?"
39:3:1:Look, I am sending my messenger who will clear the path ahead of me. Suddenly, the Lord you are seeking will come to his temple; the messenger of the covenant, in whom you delight, will surely arrive, says the Lord of hosts.
39:3:2:But who can endure the day of his coming? And who can stand when he appears? For he will be like a refiner's fire and like launderer's soap.
39:3:3:He will sit as a refiner and purifier of silver, and he will purify the descendants of Levi, refining them like gold and silver, so that they may bring offerings to the Lord in righteousness.
39:3:4:Then the offering of Judah and Jerusalem will be pleasing to the Lord, as in the days of old and as in former years.
39:3:5:I will come near to you for judgment, and I will be a swift witness against sorcerers, adulterers, perjurers, those who exploit workers, oppress widows and orphans, and deprive foreigners of justice. But do not fear me, says the Lord of hosts.
39:3:6:For I am the Lord, and I do not change; therefore, you descendants of Jacob have not been destroyed.
39:3:7:From the days of your ancestors, you have turned away from my statutes and have not kept them. Return to me, and I will return to you, says the Lord of hosts. But you ask, "How should we return?"
39:3:8:Will anyone rob God? Yet you are robbing me! But you say, "How have we robbed you?" In tithes and offerings.
39:3:9:You are cursed with a curse, for you are robbing me—the whole nation of you!
39:3:10:Bring the full tithe into the storehouse, so that there may be food in my house, and thus put me to the test, says the Lord of hosts; see if I will not open the windows of heaven for you and pour down for you an overflowing blessing.
39:3:11:I will rebuke the devourer for you, so that it will not destroy the fruits of your soil; and your vine in the field shall not fail to bear, says the Lord of hosts.
39:3:12:Then all nations will call you blessed, for you will be a land of delight, says the Lord of hosts.
39:3:13:Your words have been hard against me, says the Lord. Yet you say, "How have we spoken against you?"
39:3:14:You have said, "It is useless to serve God. What do we gain by keeping his command and walking mournfully before the Lord of hosts?
39:3:15:Now we count the arrogant as happy; evildoers not only prosper but also test God and escape."
39:3:16:Then those who revered the Lord spoke with one another. The Lord took notice and listened, and a book of remembrance was written before him of those who revered the Lord and thought on his name.
39:3:17:They shall be mine, says the Lord of hosts, my special possession on the day when I act, and I will spare them as parents spare their children who serve them.
39:3:18:Then once more you shall see the difference between the righteous and the wicked, between the one who serves God and the one who does not serve him.
39:4:1:Look, the day is coming, burning like a furnace; all the arrogant and every evildoer will be like stubble. That day will set them ablaze, says the LORD of Hosts, leaving them neither root nor branch.
39:4:2:But for you who respect my name, the sun of righteousness will rise with healing in its wings. You will go out and leap like well-fed calves.
39:4:3:You'll trample the wicked, for they will be ashes under the soles of your feet on the day I am preparing, says the LORD of Hosts.
39:4:4:Remember the teachings of Moses, my servant, which I commanded him at Horeb for all Israel—both the statutes and ordinances.
39:4:5:I will send you the prophet Elijah before the great and dreadful day of the LORD comes.
39:4:6:He will turn the hearts of parents to their children, and the hearts of children to their parents, so that I won't come and strike the land with complete destruction.